arXiv:2107.03430v1  [stat.ME]  7 Jul 2021
ENNS: Variable Selection, Regression, Classiﬁcation and
Deep Neural Network for High-Dimensional Data
Kaixu Yang and Tapabrata Maiti
yangkaix@msu.edu
maiti@msu.edu
619 Red Cedar Rd.
Department of Statistics and Probability
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI, 48824
July 9, 2021
Abstract
High-dimensional, low sample-size (HDLSS) data problems have been a topic of
immense importance for the last couple of decades. There is a vast literature that
proposed a wide variety of approaches to deal with this situation, among which variable
selection was a compelling idea. On the other hand, a deep neural network has been
used to model complicated relationships and interactions among responses and features,
which is hard to capture using a linear or an additive model. In this paper, we discuss
the current status of variable selection techniques with the neural network models.
We show that the stage-wise algorithm with neural network suﬀers from disadvantages
such as the variables entering into the model later may not be consistent. We then
propose an ensemble method to achieve better variable selection and prove that it has
probability tending to zero that a false variable is selected. Then, we discuss additional
regularization to deal with over-ﬁtting and make better regression and classiﬁcation.
We study various statistical properties of our proposed method. Extensive simulations
and real data examples are provided to support the theory and methodology.
Keywords: Bootstrap, Deep Neural Network, Ensemble, High-dimensional, Penalization,
Stage-wise selection.
1
Introduction
High-dimensional data modeling in statistics has been popular for decades, [8]. Consider
a high-dimensional regression or a binary classiﬁcation problem. Let x ∈Rp be the fea-
ture vector, and let y ∈R for regression problem and y ∈{0, 1} for classiﬁcation problem
be the response. Our goal is to build a parsimonious model based on the training sample
1
{(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}. We have more features than the sample size, i.e., p > n. Moreover,
many data have a complicated relationship among diﬀerent variables, which is hard to cap-
ture through explicit modeling. Neural network modeling is one of the best ways of capturing
complex relationships among variables with minimal mathematical assumptions. Thus, it is
interesting to consider a neural network structure between x and y.
In general, high-dimensional model does not have consistent estimations since we have less
number of observations than the number of variables without any assumptions. Two major
approaches can be used to deal with the high-dimensionality. The ﬁrst major approach is to
assume that the feature space is sparse, i.e., only a small fraction of variables are eﬀectively
included in modeling with y. A model with only a fraction of the original features enjoys
simplicity and interpretability.
Sparse solutions can be obtained using soft-thresholding
methods [22] or regularization [63, 35] or stage-wise algorithms [24]. Regularization obtains
a sparse solution by shrinking the unimportant features’ coeﬃcients to zero. The estimated
coeﬃcients are shrinkage estimators and thus have smaller variance [17]. However, regular-
ization with multiple tuning parameters takes longer to run and maybe sensitive in tuning
the parameters in practice. Stage-wise algorithms add variables one by one and stop at a
preferred stopping time.
The second dominant approach is projection-based. One ﬁnds a lower-dimensional rep-
resentation of the original feature space. Linear projection methods include the PCA [34] in
the low dimensional case and some of its variants [37, 78] in the high-dimensional case. Ker-
nel PCA [55] performs PCA on a reproducing kernel Hilbert space to achieve non-linearity.
Manifold learning, [41] embeds the original feature space to a low-dimensional manifold.
Except for the manifold learning algorithms that reduce the original dimensionality to two
or three dimension for visualization, a few manifolding learning including the multidimen-
sional sacling (MDS) by [65], the local linear embedding (LLE) by [54], and the Isomap by
[61] are applied to low-dimensional dimensionality reduction. Applications of the manifold
learning algorithms in the high-dimensional set up is studied for speciﬁc ﬁelds, but a general
framework is not available. The current manifold learning algorithms focus more on data
visualization, which reduces the dimensionality to two or three, see, for example, [67]. An-
other popular dimension reduction technique is the auto-encoder [40], which uses a neural
network to encode the feature space and decode the representation to be as close to the
original feature space as possible. All of the above methods are unsupervised, and the lower-
dimensional representation is no longer preserves any of the original features. Therefore, we
lose interpretability by adopting this approach. Thus, these applications are not useful in
building regression models.
On the other hand, neural networks have been utilized to model complicated relationship
since 1940s [39], and gained much more attention since the great improvements in computer
hardware in this century. Speciﬁcally, [50] showed that the computation of neural networks
could be greatly improved by GPU (graphics computing unit) acceleration than purely run-
ning on CPU (central processing unit), this makes it easy to train deeper network structures.
Nowadays, variants of neural networks are being applied world-wide, including the convolu-
tional neural network (CNN), recurrent neural network (RNN), residual network (ResNet),
etc. In theory, a neural network works in representing complicated relationships, mainly lies
on the universal approximation theorem [18, 4, 1, 58]. The theorem states that a shallow
neural network (neural network with one hidden layer) is able to approximate any contin-
2
uous function with an arbitrarily small error given a large number of hidden nodes, under
mild assumptions. In practice, to achieve this good approximation, usually, a massive set of
training data is needed, since the number of parameters in a neural network is much more
than that in other conventional statistical models. Moreover, the non-convexity of a neural
network structure makes it impossible to obtain a global optimum. Luckily, a local optimum
of the neural network provides a good approximation in a reasonable practical sense.
Deep Neural Network (DNN) is a neural network with a deep structure of hidden layers,
which has better performance than the shallow neural network (neural network with only
one hidden layer) in many aspects in a broad ﬁeld of applications such as pattern recognition,
speech recognition and computer vision, see for example [48, 43, 36]. The deep structure has
a greater approximation power than a shallow neural network. There have been a few works
regarding the approximation power of deep neural networks [5, 53, 57, 25].
The results
suggest that using a deep neural network helps reduce the approximation error, which is
useful in the cases where the approximation error dominates the total error. Therefore, it’s
necessary to consider a deep neural network model over a shallow model. However, ﬁnding a
way to make the deep neural network well trained (statistically consistent) on small sample
size is necessary.
In this paper, we discuss the stage-wise variable selection algorithm with neural networks.
We show that the existing stage-wise algorithm performs well at the beginning and selects
the correct variables. However, at the later steps, the probability that it selects a correct
variable decreases. Thus we propose an ensemble algorithm embedded with the stage-wise
variable selection algorithm, named ensemble neural network selection (ENNS) algorithm.
We show that the new algorithm selects all correct variables with high probability and its
false positive rate converges to zero. Moreover, instead of a regular neural network trained
on the selected variables, we propose a few methods to further reduce the variance of the
ﬁnal model. We provide some theoretical developments for statistical properties. Then we
conduct an extensive numerical study to support our theoretical claims and validation of the
proposed methodology. In the sequel, we propose an algorithm for the l1 penalized neural
network with soft-thresholding operators that addresses over-ﬁtting issues.
The article is organized as follows: In section 2, we discuss some major related works
and the intrinsic dimensionality of a complex model. In section 3, we present the ideas and
algorithms behind the ENNS algorithm and the methods of increasing stability during the
estimation step. In section 4, we provide the theory for supporting the methodology. In
section 5, we present our numeric study to support our claims. Section 7 concludes the
article with some future directions.
2
Related works
In this section, we discuss some important related works.
2.1
The regularization approach
There is a considerable amount of literature that have discussed achieving sparsity via regu-
larization [63, 26, 76, 73, 45, 27, 35, 47]. Let θ be the parameters of a model. A direct method
3
is to add a zero norm of the parameters ∥θ∥0 to the loss function. However, optimizing a
loss function with zero norms has been proved to be a non-deterministic polynomial-time
hardness (NP-hard) problem, which requires exponential time to solve, [49]. However, it
has been proved that instead of directly penalizing the number of nonzero coeﬃcients by
l0 norm, l1 type penalty is able to shrink some coeﬃcients to zero, and thus the features
corresponding to these zero coeﬃcients are not included in the model, [63]. A great number
of work has been done with the lasso estimator. Adaptive methods ([76]) assigns diﬀerent
weights to diﬀerent coeﬃcients using a data-driven way, which obtains oracle solutions. [13]
studied the bootstrap lasso estimator and its variations, and showed the strong consistency
of the estimator. [12] studies the consistency properties in the bootstrap adaptive lasso.
[19] proposed a modiﬁed perturbation bootstrap adaptive lasso estimator and showed its
higher order consistency in the high-dimensional set up. The lasso penalty can be extended
to adopt group-wise penalization, [73, 35], commonly known as group lasso. The power of
regularization is decided through the hyperparameter, which is also called the tuning pa-
rameter, by checking some criteria, such as, BIC ([56]), EBIC ([14]), GIC ([75, 28]) or by
cross-validations.
Variations of the l1 norm regularization are also widely used. It’s known that l1 norm reg-
ularization yields sparse solution ([63]), while l2 norm regularization controls the magnitude
of coeﬃcients, eases multicolinearity and overﬁtting. The l1 + l2 norm regularization both
yields sparse solution and encourages group eﬀects ([77]). The lp,1 norm penalization ([73],
[2]), where p = 2 matches the group lasso penalty, yields group sparsity. The lp,1, l1 norm
penalty, known as the sparse group lasso penalty, yields both group sparsity and in-group
sparsity solutions, ([59]). Some variation of the norm regularization methods include the
Dantzig selector [10], which is a variation of the lasso. The SCAD [26] is deﬁned from the
derivative, instead of directly deﬁned from the penalty term.
The regularization approach requires the assumption that only a few features are relevant
in predicting the response, all other features either have exactly zero coeﬃcients (strong
sparsity assumption), for example, in the linear regression set up
βj = 0,
for j ∈A0 ⊂{1, ..., p}
and
#{βj, j /∈A0} = s << p,
or the coeﬃcients of irrelevant features are bounded from above by a negligible term (weak
sparsity assumption)
X
j∈A0
|βj| ≤η
and
#{βj, j /∈A0} = s << p
(for example, see [74]). If the sparsity assumption is satisﬁed, the regularization approach
with proper penalty yields a sparse solution with high probability (that the true subset
of relevant features is selected ) under some common mild conditions.
An advantage of
this approach is that we know which features are selected, and thus the model has better
interpretability.
2.2
Deep neural network approximation
It’s well known, the universal approximation theorem [18], that a shallow neural network
with k hidden nodes, denoted as SNk(x) can be used to approximate any continuous function
4
f(x) deﬁned in a bounded domain with arbitrarily small error
|SNk(x) −f(x)| < ǫ
for all x in the bounded domain with a big enough k. This pioneering theorem encourages
neural network to be used widely. Later as the development of deep neural networks, re-
searchers found the limitations of shallow neural network such that the number of neurons
needed to achieve a desire error increases as fast as exponentially [15, 16]. Later, they found
that “the two hidden layer model may be signiﬁcantly more promising than the single hidden
layer model” [52]. Sum neural networks, or equivalently, polynomial neural networks have
been studied [20, 46], and universal approximation property has been established recently
by [25] that a continuous function in F n
d can be approximated with error ǫ by a quadratic
network that has depth
O

log(log(1
ǫ)) + log(1
ǫ)

and number of weights
O

log(log(1
ǫ))(1
ǫ)d/n + log(1
ǫ)(1
ǫ)d/n

where d is the dimension of domain.
The approximation theory for regular deep neural
networks have also been established recently. [53] showed that a deep network need
O

(n −1)
 ǫ
L
−2
model complexity to approximate a L-Lipshitz continuous function of n variables instead of
O
 ǫ
L
−n
in a shallow neural network. [57] and [58] provide much detail mathematical treatment for
the deep neural network approximation power.
2.3
Variable selection and regularization in neural networks
In terms of variable selection in neural networks, [11] proposes an algorithm to prune hidden
nodes in low-dimensional setup, while [60] proposes a dropout technique to eliminate hidden
nodes randomly. These methods set coeﬃcients to zero and thus reduce the generalization
variance, but do not help in the high-dimensional setup, where one needs to eliminate the
unimportant input features.
In the high-dimensional setup, a neural network has even many more parameters and thus
is harder to train compared to its low-dimensional setup. When we have a relatively smaller
sample size compared to the huge number of parameters, a neural network usually having
high variance. A few researchers have studied this property [29, 44, 72, 42]. By applying the
group lasso regularization [73], one can shrink the whole connections of a speciﬁc variable
to exact zero, and thus performs variable selection.
However, regularization methods in
5
neural networks involve too many tuning parameters and therefore make the neural network
sensitive to a small change in the tuning parameters in practice. [44] also presents a stage-
wise variable selection algorithm with neural networks, called deep neural pursuit (DNP),
which uses correlation to add new variables and enjoys faster speed. These methods are
extensions of the high-dimensional linear models or additive models, which act as pioneers
of this emerging topic.
2.4
Algorithms
The regularization methods usually involve l1 norm penalty term, which is not easy to solve
using regular gradient descent algorithms, see, for example, [68]. This issue is general for all
models with l1 penalty. The regularization path for generalized linear models can be easily
obtained from coordinate descent algorithms [69, 30].
Various algorithms are used to obtain a path selection. The least angle regression provides
a forward algorithm to add new features by looking at the correlation, [24]. The LARS
algorithm with simple modiﬁcation can be used to obtain the lasso solution path.
[64]
provides a stage-wise algorithm, which provides a very close solution path to the lasso solution
path. [51] studied a stage-wise algorithm to incorporate the l2, l1 and l0 norm penalty with
gradients with respect to the input weights. The gradient has implicit connections with the
correlation studied by [24].
For the other penalties, [62] shows that there is an equivalence between using the stage-
wise algorithm and the group lasso penalty. [44] applies deep artiﬁcial neural networks to
perform feature selection.
3
Proposed Methodology: Two-step variable selection
and estimation
In this section, we propose a two-step variable selection and estimation approach with deep
neural networks. We discuss the methodology in the following subsections.
Just to recap, we replicate the data structure again. Consider a feature vector x ∈Rp
and a response y ∈R for the regression set up and y ∈{0, 1} in the classiﬁcation set
up. We have data {(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)} consisting of independent observations. Denote the
design matrix X = (x1, ..., xn)T ∈Rn×p and the response vector y = (y1, ..., yn)T. As we
mentioned before, we have more variables than observations, i.e., p > n. According to the
previous discussion, variable selection is an important step in high-dimensional modeling.
If one includes all variables in the model, there will be at least p parameters to estimate,
which can not be done consistently with the n observations. If a more complicated model is
needed, the number of parameters will be tremendous, which will cause severe over-ﬁtting
and high variance with a small training sample size.
Therefore, we hope a feature selection step at ﬁrst can help pick the import variables,
and another estimation step could build a more accurate model based on the selected vari-
ables. Moreover, we will use deep neural networks as the structure, since it will be able
to capture the complicated relationships. We will consider a stage-wise algorithm in the
variable selection step, which operates similarly to the DNP model, [44]. However, we will
6
show that the stage-wise algorithm in DNP suﬀers from some disadvantage and propose an
ensemble algorithm to relieve this situation. In the second step, we will discuss the methods
of variance reduction and prevent over-ﬁtting, since a deep neural network with only a few
input variables can still have a huge number of parameters.
3.1
The ensemble neural network selection (ENNS) algorithm
Consider the feature selection approach in [44]. Let D : Rp →R be a deep neural network
function that maps the original feature space to the output space. We don’t speciﬁcally
mark the number of hidden layers and hidden node sizes in notation, but simply assume the
deep neural network has m hidden layers with sizes h1, ..., hm. Denote the weight matrices
in each layer to be W 0, ..., W m, where W 0 ∈Rp×h1, W i ∈Rhi×hi+1 for i = 1, ..., m −1 and
W m ∈Rhm×1. Denote ti the intercept for the ith hidden layer and b the intercept of the
output layer. Let θ = (W 0, ..., W m, t1, ..., tm, b) be the parameters in the neural network
model. For an input x ∈Rp, denote the output
ηθ,x = Dθ(x)
(1)
where in the regression set up, the output is from a linear layer and η ∈R, while in the
classiﬁcation, an extra sigmoid layer is added and η ∈(0, 1). Moreover, we assume sparse
feature, i.e., only a small fraction of the variables are signiﬁcantly related to the response.
Without loss of generality, we assume
S0 = {1, ..., s}
of the variables are truly nonzero variables.
Deﬁne the loss function for regression to be the squared error loss
l(θ) = E

(y −η)2
(2)
In practice, we work with the empirical loss
l(θ; X, y) = 1
n∥y −η∥2
2
(3)
where η ∈Rn with ηi = ηθ,xi, i = 1, ..., n. Deﬁne the loss function for classiﬁcation to be
the negative log-likelihood, which is known as the cross-entropy loss
l(θ) = E [y log η + (1 −y) log(1 −η)]
(4)
In practice, we work with the empirical loss
l(θ; X, y) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
[yi log ηi + (1 −yi) log(1 −ηi)]
(5)
Let Gi be the gradient of the loss function with respect to W i in the back propagation
process for i = 0, ..., m, i.e.,
Gi =
∂
∂W i
l(θ; X, y),
i = 0, ..., m
(6)
7
The DNP algorithm starts with the null model and adds one variable at a time. Let S be
the selected set and C be the candidate set. At the beginning, we have
S = {intercept}
and
C = {1, ..., p}
(7)
The model is trained on S only and the submatrix of W 0 corresponding to the features in
C is kept zero. After the training done, one chooses a lq norm (usually with q = 2) and
compute the gradient’ norm for each j ∈C of W 0.
G0j =
∂
∂W 0j
l(θ; X, y),
j ∈C
(8)
The next variable that enters the model, j+ is
j+ = arg max
j∈C
∥G0j∥q
(9)
Then S = S ∪{j+} and C = C/{j+}. To increase the stability, instead of computing G0j
directly, the DNP algorithm computes G0j through the average over multiple dropouts. Let
B1 be the number of dropouts, the next variable is
j+ = arg max
j∈C
1
B1
B1
X
b=1
∥Gb0j∥q
(10)
where Gb0j denotes the gradient of the loss function with respect to the ﬁrst layer’s jth weight
vector after the bth random dropout.
The algorithm works because ∥G0j∥q describes how much the loss function will change
when the next update on the corresponding variable’s weight is performed, [51]. [62] also
indicates that selecting variable by comparing ∥G0j∥q has an equivalence to applying the
group lasso penalization, see also [45].
The algorithm works well at the very beginning, which is described by proposition A.1
and proposition A.2 in section 4. However, it suﬀers from a few disadvantages. First, as we
include more correct variables in the model, the probability that we select another correct
variable decreases. A simulation study in section 5 also provides numeric support for this
argument. Second, one needs to pre-specify how many variables need to be selected before
stopping, denoted s0. If this number is chosen to be more than the number of true variables,
denoted s, there will be s0−s additional variables that should not have been included, i.e., the
false positive rate could be high. Finally, the model does not use dropout or regularization
during prediction, which has potential over-ﬁtting risk. Here we propose the ensemble neural
network selection (ENNS) algorithm to remove these issues, and we discuss possible solutions
in preventing over-ﬁtting at the regression or classiﬁcation step.
One could observe that when a fraction of S0 are already involved in the model, i.e.,
in S, the model is trained such that these variables are used to explain the variations by
all variables in S0. This weakens the eﬀect of those truly nonzero variables in C. These
variables become less important than when there’s no variable in S. Moreover, there are
less true nonzero and zero variables in C than at the very beginning, the probability that we
select a correct variable in the next step is
P(jnext ∈S0) =
X
j∈S0∩C
P(jnext = j)
(11)
8
which will be sequentially lower as |S0 ∩C| decreases. Therefore, there will be a nonzero
probability that at one stage the selected variable does not belong to S0. We consider an
ensemble method to overcome this issue.
The idea behind this ensemble method is motivated by bagging, ([7, 9]). Assume that
we want to add sj variables in one step. Consider a bootstrap sample of size nb from the
original sample. The DNP with random initialization is trained on this sample, which yields
a selection set S1 = {j1, ..., jsj}. Instead of just doing one pass, we propose that for b2
in 1, ..., B2 and a bootstrap sample size nr, we perform the feature selection on a random
selection of nr observations. Denote the features being selected in all B2 rounds as
J1 = {j11, ..., j1sj}, ..., JB2 = {jB21, ..., jB2sj}
We will only allow a variable to enter the model if it appears at least [B2ps] times in the B2
rounds, for a ﬁxed proportion ps. Mathematically,
J = {j in at least [B2ps] of J1, ..., JB2}
is the set of variables that will actually enter the model in this step.
The reason that this ensemble improves the selection, lies on three points. First, the
algorithm is an averaging of diﬀerent bootstrapping results, thus the eﬀect of some extreme
observations could be averaged out. The ﬁnal selection result represents the common part
of the whole sample. Second, the neural network uses random initialization. In two diﬀerent
training, though the predictions seem similar, the estimated parameters are actually from
diﬀerent local minimums of the loss function.
Therefore, these diﬀerent training results
represent diﬀerent aspects of the model. Combining the two reasons, if we select a smaller
nr compared to n, the selection results are closer to independent. However, nr can not be
too small to avoid misleading the neural network. Finally, if a variable is selected by mistake
in some round, this is possibly due to the speciﬁc bootstrap sample making the relationship
between the variable and the response stronger, which is not general in all bootstrap samples.
In practice, one will observe that though false selection happens, those false variables are
diﬀerent in diﬀerent rounds. Therefore, this ensemble will actually make the probability
of false selection tend to zero. This observation is supported by theorem 4.1 in section 4.
Moreover, if two variables’ interaction eﬀect is important in the model, they are likely to be
included in the model at the same step.
It’s possible that the proposed method selects less or more variables than the number of
variables we speciﬁed, sj. If the sample is not enough to represent the true relationship be-
tween the variables and the response, it’s very possible that the number of selected variables,
denoted ˆsj, is less than sj. In this case, we exclude the variables that are already in C from
the neural network and perform another round of variable selection with S = {1, ..., p}/C and
then C = {intercept}. The number of variables to be selected in this round will be sj −ˆsj.
On the other hand, ˆsj being more than sj happens when the selection proportion ps is spec-
iﬁed too small. In this case, one would sort the variables by their appearing proportions and
only select the ﬁrst sj variables in the list.
In summary, we specify a number s0 at the very beginning, which mean the ﬁnal model
will include s0 variables. In the jth iteration, let sj be the number of variables to be selected.
Right now there are |Sj| variables in the model, denoted Sj. Let X−n be the sub-matrix of
9
X where the columns with indices in Sj removed. Train the ensemble on X−n and obtain se-
lection result ˆSj. Let sj+1 = sj −| ˆSj|. The algorithm is repeated until the model has selected
s0 variables. An algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. Under mild assumptions, the algorithm
ﬁnally reaches selection consistency. This argument has been justiﬁed mathematically in
theorem 4.2, section 4. Moreover, a comparison of the variable selection performances of
diﬀerent modeling is also presented in section 5.
Initialize number of selected variables S = ∅, s = 0 and target s0;
while |S| < s0 do
for b = 1, ..., B do
Bootstrap sampling;
Random initialization with zero feature;
Run the DNP algorithm and obtain selection set Jb;
end
Obtain J = SB
b=1 Jb;
Compute JT by ﬁltering number of appearance;
if JT <= s0 −|S| then
S = S ∪JT;
Remove the columns in JT from training data;
else
JT is the m −s elements with highest number of appearance;
S = S ∪JT;
end
end
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for feature selection ENNS
The computation complexity of the ENNS algorithm on a single machine is the number of
bagged neural networks times the computation complexity of training a single neural network,
which is equal to O(Bhsnp). Here B is the number of bagged neural networks, h is the neural
network structure complexity, s is the number of variables to be selected, n is the sample
size and p is the variable dimension. However, since bagging algorithm has independent
elements, it’s easy to parallelize the bagged neural networks by submitting diﬀerent jobs. In
this case, the computation complexity reduces to O(hsnp), which is the same as that of DNP
in [44]. As a comparison, [44] also mentioned the computation complexity of HSIC-Lasso in
[70], which grows cubicly with the sample size as O(sn3p).
Moreover, the algorithm is less sensitive to the choice of s0 compared to the DNP (without
ensemble) given that it is suﬃciently large, . The ENNS algorithm will be more likely stopped
when an appropriate number of variables enter. Specifying a too small s0 will harm both
the algorithms, since one forces the algorithm to stop before the correct number of variables
enter. In practice, specifying a large s0 to ENNS or tune s0 with cross-validation works well.
In detail, the cross-validation can be performed on the ENNS with a few pre-speciﬁed s0’s
and then the second stage estimation can be performed as described in the next subsection.
10
3.2
Estimation with regularization
In this subsection ,we will discuss possible procedures to prevent over-ﬁtting. After feature
selection, the deep neural network can be trained on the selected features. However, the
number of parameters in the neural network model is still huge. For example, a neural net-
work with four hidden layers consist of h1, · · · , h4 nodes respectively and s selected variables
has sh1 +h1h2 +h2h3 +h3h4 +h4 parameters (without counting the intercepts). Thus, if one
uses the hidden layer sizes as [50, 30, 15, 10] with the number of selected variables being ﬁve,
that brings 2466 parameters. As a comparison, the linear model will have only six param-
eters, while a GAM with four knots and degree three will have 36 parameters. Therefore,
ﬁtting a deep network with a small sample size still face challenging issues. One has to be
careful of training the neural network on the selected variables. A few possible methods are
discussed below. The Xavier initialization is used here to assure that the initial weights are
in a proper range, [32].
3.2.1
Dropping out and bagging
During the variable selection step, over-ﬁtting is overcome by dropout layers, where we
randomly set parameters to zero in the later layers. However, dropout layers in prediction
is risky, since we are not able to measure the prediction quality when performing a random
dropout.
One way out is, use bagging again in this step.
First, the connections in the
estimated neural network, denoted N is randomly cut oﬀ, i.e., the weights are set to zero. By
doing this we obtain a model Nr, where r stands for reduced connections. Then a prediction
is made on model Nr, denoted ˆyr. This process is repeated for K times. Denote the reduced
neural networks to be Nkr and the associated predictions are ˆykr. In the regression set up,
the ﬁnal prediction is deﬁned as
ˆy = 1
K
K
X
k=1
ˆykr
In the classiﬁcation set up, the ﬁnal prediction is deﬁned as
ˆyi =
(
1,
if ˆpi > pc
0,
if ˆpi < pc
,
for i = 1, ..., n
where pc is some pre-speciﬁed threshold. In practice, a typical choice is pc = 1/2.
ˆp = 1
K
K
X
k=1
ˆykr
and ˆpi is the ith element of ˆp. A simulation study is performed to show its eﬃcacy in Section
5.
3.2.2
Stage-wise training
The stage-wise training idea comes from [44], where the authors used it as a step-wise
variable selection technique. However, here we adopt the idea to train the ﬁnal model on
11
the selected variables. The intuition behind this is that at each step, the information that
is already trained remains in the training process. Therefore, adding a new variable adjusts
the previous trained weights. Moreover, training with adaptive gradient algorithm (Adagrad,
[23]) allows adaptive learning rates for diﬀerent parameters and thus ensures faster and more
accurate convergence. In detail, assume that we have selected m variables J from the ENNS
algorithm. Let XJ be the sub-matrix of X whose columns’ indices are in J . Then the
DNP algorithm in [44] is trained on XJ with |J | being the target number of variables. The
performance is assessed through the simulation study reported in Section 5.
3.2.3
l1 norm regularization
As mentioned in section 2 that l1 regularization produces sparse neural network and controls
over-ﬁtting by shrinking parameters towards zero, and some parameters can be shrunk to
exact zero. Therefore, we choose to use l1 norm regularization to control the parameter size
and the number of nonzero parameters.
Let ˆS be the set of indices of the variables that are selected from the ﬁrst step. Let
W = W 1, ..., W L be the hidden layer weights and t = t1, ..., tL be the hidden layer intercepts
(including the output layer).
Let f(x; W , t) be the neural network structure with such
parameters that maps the original input to the output. In the regression problem, deﬁne
ˆ
W ,ˆt = arg min
W ,t
1
n
n
X
i=1
h
yi −f(x ˆS,i)
i2
+
L
X
l=1
λnl|W l|,
(12)
and in the classiﬁcation problem, deﬁne
ˆ
W ,ˆt = arg min
W ,t
−1
n
n
X
i=1
h
yif(x ˆS,i) −log(1 + exp(f(x ˆS,i)))
i
+
L
X
l=1
λnl|W l|,
(13)
where x ˆS,i denotes the ith observation with only the selected variables.
A direct training of the loss function (13) with the built-in l1 loss penalty directly added
to the cross-entropy loss does not work well in the current neural network libraries includ-
ing tensorﬂow and pytorch. Therefore, a coordinate descent algorithm is needed to obtain
sparsity in the neural network. Deﬁne the soft-thresholding operator S(·, ·) : Rd × R →Rd
as
(S(x, c))j = sign(xj)(|xj| −c)+,
j = 1, ..., d.
(14)
The algorithm consists an iterative process of updating the neural network weights with-
out the l1 penalty and then applying the soft-thresholding operator 14.
The number of
epochs is pre-speciﬁed. However, the performance on the validation set can be monitored
and an early-stopping criterion can be speciﬁed. The training will be stopped if the perfor-
mance on the validation set does not improve for a pre-speciﬁed number of patience level. It
worth noting that instead of selecting the tuning parameter, a sparsity level of each layer can
be speciﬁed. Assuming there are M hidden layers with sizes h1, h2, ..., hM. One may specify
percentile pm for m = 1, ..., M. Denote Wm the weight of layer m and Wpm the pth
m percentile
of Wpm. Then for layer m, the soft-thresholding operator can be applied as S(Wm, Wpm).
For example, choosing a percentile of 50 will make a layer having 50% sparsity level. An
12
algorithm is given in Algorithm 2. A simulation that compares the built-in l1 penalty and
the soft-thresholding operator is provided is Section 5.
Initialize the weights with Xavier initialization;
while Early stopping False OR epochs < k do
One step gradient descent for the neural network part;
for weights in layers do
Apply the soft-thresholding function with a pre-speciﬁed percentile;
end
Check early stopping criterion;
end
Algorithm 2: Algorithm for l1 norm estimation using coordinate descent
4
Theoretical Guarantee
In this section, we develop theoretical supports for the proposed methodology and associated
intuitions.
A few assumptions are made in the derivations of theoretical results.
These
assumptions along with two propositions can be found in the appendix A.
Proposition A.1 and A.2 describe the behavior of neural network stage-wise algorithm
at the very beginning. The probability that we select one predictor over another depends
on the sum or the diﬀerence of their signal strengths. The greater the diﬀerence, the higher
probability that we select the predictor with higher signal strength. The probability that
we select a correct predictor at the very beginning is described by the error function and
standard normal density functions. Though the form of the probability looks complicated,
the error function can be approximated by an exponential function with proper constants.
Then the proposition shows that there is situation under which a non-zero variable entering
into the model with the stage-wise selection algorithm is not guaranteed with probability 1.
Speciﬁcally, this happens when we have a low signal strength or a huge number of candidate
variables.
So there is a concern that a wrong variable will mistakenly enter into the model due to a
special training case of the neural network model, as shown in the previous proposition. With
the bagging algorithm, we are able to eliminate the false positive selections with probability
tending to 1. The intuition is that the false positive selection of a certain predictor happens
due to a speciﬁc observation of the design matrix, which appears to be more correlated to
the response or residual. However, with diﬀerent sub-samplings, it’s very unlikely that they
yield the same wrong selection. This property is captured by the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 Under the assumptions 2 3, 4 and 5, and also assume that
s0 ≤C · s = o(p)
and
p −s0
s
e−nγn →0 as n →∞.
Let Kn be the estimated parameters’ l1 norm, which is assumed to satisfy
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
→∞
as n →∞,
13
then in each selection step of the ENNS algorithm, the probability of false positive converges
to zero, i.e.
P(j ∈ˆS and j /∈S) →0
as n →∞and B2 →∞
(15)
A proof is given in Appendix C. In this variable selection algorithms, the most important
property is ability of selecting the correct predictors consistently. Here we show that ENNS
enjoys this property in the following theorem.
Theorem 4.2 Under assumptions 2, 3, 4 and 5, let Kn be the upper bound of the norm of
the best parameters in the neural network model when S is included, and K be the size of
the ﬁrst hidden layer, with the ensemble, if γn satisﬁes
K log(p −s)
n
log

1 −1
2e−cγ2
n

→0
as n →∞
for some constant c, and
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
→∞
as n →∞
the probability that all nonzero variables are selected converges to 1, i.e.,
P( ˆS = S) →1
as n →∞and B2 →∞
(16)
A proof is given in Appendix C. The theorem 4.2 shows that the true nonzero variables with
strong enough signal, the algorithm is able to select all of them with probability tending to
1. The conditions are not veriﬁable in practice, however, extensive numerical examples in
section 5 show that the ENNS algorithm reaches selection consistency easier than the other
algorithms.
For the estimation step, there has been a few theoretical works about the asymptotic
properties, e.g., [29, 72], where the results under sparse group lasso penalty are derived. The
l1 norm penalty in the estimation step is actually a special case of the sparse group lasso [59]
with the lasso weight α = 1 and the group lasso weight 1 −α = 0. Therefore, the results of
these papers hold as long as we have ˆS = S0, which has probability tending to 1 by theorem
4.2. Here we adapt [33] and provide the following result.
Theorem 4.3 Assume the assumptions 2, 3, 4 and 5, consider the variables selected by the
ENNS algorithm and the estimation with l1 regularization method. Denote the l1 regulariza-
tion tuning parameter by λn and the corresponding Lagrangian parameter Kn. Denote the
hidden layer size with kn. In the regression set up, assume E(Y 2) < ∞, if Kn →∞, kn →∞
and kns2K4
n log(knsK2
n)/n →0, we have
lim
n→∞,B2→∞P

E
Z
|fn(x) −f(x)|2µ(dx) →0

= 1
where fn is the estimated neural network and f is the true function. In the classiﬁcation
set up, assuming that the probability of response being 1 is bounded away from 0 and 1
14
by ˜ǫ, denote with Q, the maximum number of equivalent neural network classes, choos-
ing tuning parameter λn ≥c
p
kn log n/n(√log Q + √kn log s log(nkn), if log(n)/(n˜ǫ2) →0,
s2knλ2
n/(n˜ǫ2) →0 and n−1k9/2
n s5/2p
log(sn) →0 as n →∞, we have
lim
n→∞,B2→∞P (R(fn) −R(f ∗) →0) = 1
where R(fn) is the risk of neural network classiﬁer and R(f ∗) is the risk of Bayes classiﬁer.
Theorem 4.3 states that under the previously discussed conditions, the regression reaches
weak estimation consistency of the non-parametric function deﬁned in [33]. For the clas-
siﬁcation, the neural network classiﬁer’s risk tends to the optimal risk, Bayes risk, see for
example [21]. The theorem is a direct result from the existing results of the low dimension
neural network regression model and classiﬁers, [29, 72]. Conditioning on the fact that we
can select all correct variables with probability tending to 1, applying the full probability
formula, the consistency of the two-step approach can be derived with the low dimensional
consistency plus the probability of non-selection-consistency.
The consistency error comes from two aspects: the variable selection error and the esti-
mation error. The intuition behind this is that with a wrong selection result, the estimation
error may be big, however, this happens with probability tending to zero. With a correct
selection result, the estimation error behaves the same as in the low dimensional case, which
converges to zero.
5
Simulation study
In this section, we use a few examples as numerical supports to our arguments in the previous
sections. The code for DNP is composed according to the algorithm outline in [44], and the
code of ENNS is composed according to the algorithm in this paper. Both codes can be
found at https://github.com/KaixuYang/ENNS .
5.1
Stage-wise correct selection probability decreasing study
In this subsection, we use an example to demonstrate that the chance of selecting a correct
variable in a stage-wise neural network decreases as we have more correct variables entering
into the model. Consider a design matrix X that is drawn from a uniform distribution
(−1, 1). The sample size is set to n = 1000 and the number of predictors is set to p = 10000.
Let s = 5 of the predictors are related with the response. We consider three diﬀerent true
structures of the relationship between the predictors and the response: linear, additive non-
linear and neural network.
For the response, we consider two diﬀerent cases: regression
and classiﬁcation. In the linear case, the coeﬃcients are drawn from a standard normal
distribution. In the additive non-linear case, the functions are set to
η = sin(x1) + x2 + exp(x3) + x2
4 + log(x5 + 2) −2
(17)
where y = η + ǫ in the linear case and prob = σ(η) in the classiﬁcation case.
In the
neural network case, we set hidden layers as [50, 30, 15, 10] and weights from standard normal
distribution.
15
Table 1: The proportion of correct variable selection after 0-4 correct variables in the model,
for diﬀerent cases over 1000 repetitions. The results show the mean.
Response
structure
0 variable
1 variable
2 variables
3 variables
4 variables
Regression
Linear
0.995(0.002)
0.952(0.006)
0.863(0.010)
0.774(0.013)
0.430(0.016)
Additive
0.993(0.003)
0.847(0.011)
0.905(0.009)
0.794(0.012)
0.531(0.016)
NN
0.998(0.001)
0.971(0.005)
0.932(0.007)
0.788(0.013)
0.574(0.016)
Classiﬁcation
Linear
0.989(0.003)
0.918(0.009)
0.873(0.009)
0.813(0.011)
0.552(0.016)
Additive
0.992(0.003)
0.957(0.006)
0.911(0.009)
0.706(0.014)
0.633(0.015)
NN
0.994(0.002)
0.968(0.006)
0.947(0.004)
0.895(0.009)
0.762(0.013)
For each of the cases, we test with starting from 0 to 4 correct predictors. In order to
eliminate the eﬀect of diﬀerent signal strength from diﬀerent predictors, we randomly sample
j indices from 1, ..., 5 as the selected variables, for j = 0, ..., 4, and include those j indices
predictors as the initially selected variables. We repeat the process 1000 times and report
the proportion that the next variable that enters the model is a correct predictor. The result
is summarized in table 1.
From the table 1, we see that the probability of selecting a correct predictor decreases
as correct predictors enter into the model stage-wise, in all cases. The only exception is in
the regression set up with additive non-linear structure from 1 variable to 2 variables, which
could be due to random error.
5.2
False positive rate study
In this subsection, we demonstrate empirically that the false positive rate of the proposed
ENNS (the probability of selecting a wrong variable) is superior than the pure stage-wise
algorithm. Note that if one ﬁxes the number of variables to be s, stage wise algorithm al-
ways select s variables, while ENNS will stop if there isn’t any new variable that satisfy the
condition to be added. Therefore, it’s possible that ENNS selects less number of variables
and avoid wrong selection. We use the same setup as [44] to generate responses. Two diﬀer-
ent types of responses including regression and classiﬁcation are considered here. The input
variable X is drawn from U(−1, 1), where the feature dimension p is ﬁxed at 10, 000. The
corresponding labels are obtained by passing X into the feed forward neural network with
hidden layer sizes {50, 30, 15, 10} and ReLU activation functions. Input weights connecting
the ﬁrst s inputs are randomly sampled from N(1, 1) for regression and N(0, 1) for classi-
ﬁcation. The remaining input weights are kept at zero. For each s = 2, 5, 10, we generate
1000 training samples. In table 2, we report the false positive rate for the ENNS algorithm
and the neural network stage-wise algorithm.
Note that the ENNS’s false positive rate is signiﬁcantly less than that of DNP under
signiﬁcance level α = 0.05 (using the two-proportion Z test). The results provides strong
evidence that the ENNS is eﬀective in reducing the probability of selecting an incorrect
variable.
16
Table 2: Selection false positive rate average of the ENNS and DNP under diﬀerent number
of true variables in 101 repetitions. Standard deviations are given in parenthesis.
Response
Method
s=2
s=5
s=10
Regression
ENNS
10.4%(21.5%)
11.5%(22.1%)
12.8%(23.6%)
DNP
22.5%(29.5%)
30.2%(28.7%)
41.4%(33.2%)
Classiﬁcation
ENNS
4.7%(17.9%)
7.4%(18.6%)
9.8%(20.3%)
DNP
16.5%(24.4%)
24.8%(29.7%)
40.5%(32.8%)
Table 3: Variable selection capacity of ENNS and other methods with low signal strength
in the regression (top) and classiﬁcation (bottom) set up. The numbers reported are the
average number of selected variables which are truly nonzero. The standard errors are given
in parenthesis.
Response
Method
s=2
s=5
s=10
Regression
ENNS
1.73(0.52)
4.21(0.56)
9.25(1.11)
DNP
1.61(0.50)
3.92(0.56)
8.77(1.13)
LASSO
1.65(0.57)
3.87(0.62)
9.62(1.38)
HSIC-LASSO
1.67(0.47)
3.80(0.66)
3.61(1.17)
Classiﬁcation
ENNS
1.81(0.49)
4.24(0.87)
8.04(1.25)
DNP
1.67(0.76)
3.76(1.06)
5.95(1.29)
LASSO
1.67(0.56)
3.76(0.75)
5.76(1.38)
HSIC-LASSO
1.67(0.47)
2.80(0.91)
3.61(1.17)
5.3
Variable selection simulation study
In this subsection, we study the variable selection capability of our ensemble neural network
selection (ENNS) algorithm in complex modelling. We retain similar setup as in the last
subsection to generate responses. A slight diﬀerence is that the input weights connecting the
ﬁrst s inputs are randomly sampled from N(0, 2) for regression and N(0, 1) for classiﬁcation.
The diﬀerence in the normal distribution parameters is to ensure similar signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) and ensures the signal strengths are in proper ranges for demonstration. The LASSO
[63] is implemented by the scikit learn library, and the HSIC lasso [70] is implemented using
the HSICLasso library. In all four algorithms, the number of selected variables are strictly
restricted to the true number of variables. In ENNS, we run a bagging of 10 rounds with
selection proportion 0.3. The Table 3 reports the average number of correct variables that
are selected on 101 repetitions of the data.
We observe that the ENNS outperforms the other variable selection algorithms in all
three cases, and the diﬀerence is signiﬁcant when s = 10 under a t-test. The ENNS performs
better when there are more nonzero variables. None of the algorithms were able to recon-
struct the original feature indices due to a few reasons: the sample size is relatively small
compared to the number of variables; the data generation through neural network structures
is complicated; the signal strength is relatively low.
To fully study the variable selection power of the ENNS algorithm, we implemented
another simulation in classiﬁcation using higher signal strengths while keeping all other
17
Table 4: Variable selection capacity of ENNS and other methods with normal and high
signal strength. The numbers reported are the average number of selected variables which
are truly nonzero. The standard errors are given in parenthesis.
Normal Signal Strength
High Signal Strength
Method
s=2
s=5
s=10
s=2
s=5
s=10
ENNS
2.00(0.00)
4.71(0.55)
8.38(2.06)
2.00(0.00)
5.00(0.00)
9.90(0.29)
DNP
1.86(0.35)
4.38(0.84)
7.43(2.36)
2.00(0.00)
5.00(0.00)
9.47(1.10)
LASSO
1.81(0.39)
4.19(1.01)
7.47(2.40)
2.00(0.00)
4.90(0.29)
9.23(1.74)
HSIC-LASSO
1.71(0.45)
3.71(1.12)
4.95(2.13)
2.00(0.00)
4.62(0.84)
7.76(2.76)
conditions the same. In the simulation study, we increase the mean weights of the nonzero
variables to 3.5 and 10. With same implementations, we summarize the results in Table 4.
The ENNS reaches selection consistency when s = 2, while the other competitive algo-
rithms still do not have selection consistency. However, all algorithms have obvious improve-
ments in all cases under strong signals. We have to admit that selecting the correct subset of
variables in all 101 repetitions is extremely challenging, since the data have great variability
in diﬀerent repetitions. Moreover, when s becomes larger, the importance of a few variables
are less likely to be observed from the data.
We like to reiterate that the bagging algorithm can be paralyzed since diﬀerent runs are
independent to each other. Therefore, the computational eﬃciency of this variable selection
algorithm is almost the same as the computation eﬃciency of a single run.
6
Real data examples
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the two-step model on real-world data sets.
6.1
Regression: riboﬂavin production data
In this example, we consider the riboﬂavin production with bacillus subtilis data, which is
publicly available in the ‘hdi’ package in R. The data set contains a continuous response,
which is the logarithm of the riboﬂavin production rate, and p = 4088 predictors which are
the logarithm of the expression level of 4088 genes. There are n = 71 observations available.
All predictors are continuous with positive values.
We perform 50 repetitions of the following actions. The data is split into training (56)
and testing (15) observations.
The training data is further split into training (49) and
validation (7). The training data is normalized with mean zero and standard deviation one.
We train the ENNS algorithm to select variables and perform the l1 neural network to make
a prediction. Along with our proposed algorithms, we compare the performance with the
lasso penalized linear regression, which is implemented by the scikit-learn library in python;
the group lasso penalized generalized additive model in [71], where the code can be found
at https://github.com/KaixuYang/PenalizedGAM ; and the sparse group lasso penalized
neural network in [29]. Figure (1) shows the average testing mean squared error (MSE)
along with the number of selected features for diﬀerent models. Our proposed algorithm
18
Table 5: Test MSE with standard error in parentheses and median of number of features for
diﬀerent models in the riboﬂavin gene data example.
Model
Test MSE
Number of features
ENNS+l1 neural network
0.268(0.115)
42
Regularized neural network
0.273(0.135)
44
Linear model with LASSO
0.286(0.124)
38
Generalized additive model with group lasso
0.282(0.136)
46
converges fast and produces competitive performance. Table 5 shows the average prediction
accuracy with standard error in parentheses and the median number of variables selected.
Our proposed method has mean competitive performance but lowers standard errors.
The ﬁnal model of small sample utilizes only two hidden layers, with over 90% sparsity
to prevent over-ﬁtting, which is necessary for this small training sample size, 49. Training
with large batch size, small learning rate, a huge number of epochs and early stopping help
the model learn better and prevent over-ﬁtting. We admit that tuning the network structure
and learning parameters are hard, but we obtain better and stable results once we have the
right numbers.
6.2
Classiﬁcation: prostate cancer data
In this example, we consider a prostate cancer gene expression data, which is publicly avail-
able at http://featureselection.asu.edu/datasets.php. The data set contains a binary
response with 102 observations on 5966 predictor variables. Clearly, the data set is really a
high dimensional data set. The responses have values 1 (50 sample points) and 2 (52 sam-
ple points), where 1 indicates normal and 2 indicates tumor. All predictors are continuous
predictors, with positive values.
We perform 50 repetitions of the following actions. The data is split into training (81)
and testing (21) observations.
The training data is further split into training (70) and
validation data (11). In each split, the number of class 0 observations and number of class
1 observations are kept roughly the same. We train the ENNS algorithm to select variables
and perform the l1 neural network to make predictions. Along with our proposed algorithms,
we compare the performance with the l1 norm penalized logistic regression; the l1 support
vector machine (SVM), both of which are implemented with the scikit-learn library in python;
the group lasso penalized generalized additive model in [71], where the code can be found
at https://github.com/KaixuYang/PenalizedGAM ; and the sparse group lasso penalized
neural network of [29]. Figure (1) shows the average testing accuracy over the 20 repetitions
along with the number of selected features for diﬀerent models. Our proposed algorithm
converges fast and performs competitively. Table 6 shows the average prediction accuracy
with standard error in parentheses, and the median number of selected variables.
Our
proposed method has competitive mean performance but lower standard error. One needs
to notice that the mean performance is hard to improve further, since the results are already
good and reach the bottleneck of the current explanatory power. The reason that GAM
performs worse than the other models is that the range of predictor variables are relatively
19
Figure 1: Testing mean squared error (MSE) for diﬀerent models on the riboﬂavin data (left)
and testing accuracy for diﬀerent models on the prostate cancer data (right).
Table 6: Test accuracy with standard error in parentheses and median of number of features
for diﬀerent classiﬁers in the Prostate gene data example.
Classiﬁer
Test accuracy
Number of features
ENNS+l1 neural network
0.956(0.053)
15
Regularized neural network
0.955(0.066)
18
Logistic Regression with Lasso
0.933(0.058)
36
l1 penalized Linear SVM
0.950(0.052)
16
Generalized additive model with group lasso
0.918(0.061)
5
small and skewed, thus the basis expansion on GAM does not work well.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we discussed the existing methods to deal with high-dimensional data and
how to apply the stage-wise algorithm with neural networks. We discussed the shortcomings
of the current stage-wise neural network variable selection algorithms and proposed a new
algorithm, ENNS to overcome these issues.
We also compared diﬀerent methods to fur-
ther reduce the over-ﬁtting problem after the variable selection is done. Various theoretical
derivations were provided to support the methodology, intuition, new algorithms, and exten-
sive simulation studies were presented as empirical evidence that the methodology works in
practice. f Though there’s a few algorithmic and methodology studies with neural network
variable selection, the theory for a neural network still deserves much more investigations.
We hope this paper could work as a pioneer and attracts more attention to the theory and
methodology for high dimensional neural network models.
20
8
Acknowledgement
This research is partially supported by NSF-DMS 1945824.
References
[1] M. Anthony and P. L. Bartlett.
Neural network learning: Theoretical foundations.
cambridge university press, 2009.
[2] A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil. Multi-task feature learning. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 41–48, 2007.
[3] R. Arratia and L. Gordon. Tutorial on large deviations for the binomial distribution.
Bulletin of mathematical biology, 51(1):125–131, 1989.
[4] A. R. Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal func-
tion. IEEE Transactions on Information theory, 39(3):930–945, 1993.
[5] M. Bianchini and F. Scarselli. On the complexity of neural network classiﬁers: A com-
parison between shallow and deep architectures. IEEE transactions on neural networks
and learning systems, 25(8):1553–1565, 2014.
[6] G. Biau, L. Devroye, and G. Lugosi. Consistency of random forests and other averaging
classiﬁers. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9(Sep):2015–2033, 2008.
[7] L. Breiman. Bagging predictors. Machine learning, 24(2):123–140, 1996.
[8] P. B¨uhlmann and S. Van De Geer. Statistics for high-dimensional data: methods, theory
and applications. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
[9] P. B¨uhlmann, B. Yu, et al. Analyzing bagging. The Annals of Statistics, 30(4):927–961,
2002.
[10] E. Candes, T. Tao, et al. The dantzig selector: Statistical estimation when p is much
larger than n. The annals of Statistics, 35(6):2313–2351, 2007.
[11] G. Castellano and A. M. Fanelli. Variable selection using neural-network models. Neu-
rocomputing, 31(1-4):1–13, 2000.
[12] A. Chatterjee and S. Lahiri. Rates of convergence of the adaptive lasso estimators to
the oracle distribution and higher order reﬁnements by the bootstrap. The Annals of
Statistics, 41(3):1232–1259, 2013.
[13] A. Chatterjee and S. N. Lahiri. Bootstrapping lasso estimators. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 106(494):608–625, 2011.
[14] J. Chen and Z. Chen. Extended bayesian information criteria for model selection with
large model spaces. Biometrika, 95(3):759–771, 2008.
21
[15] C. Chui, X. Li, and H. N. Mhaskar.
Neural networks for localized approximation.
Mathematics of Computation, 63(208):607–623, 1994.
[16] C. K. Chui, X. Li, and H. N. Mhaskar. Limitations of the approximation capabilities
of neural networks with one hidden layer. Advances in Computational Mathematics,
5(1):233–243, 1996.
[17] J. B. Copas. Regression, prediction and shrinkage. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Methodological), 45(3):311–335, 1983.
[18] G. Cybenko. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics of
control, signals and systems, 2(4):303–314, 1989.
[19] D. Das, K. Gregory, S. Lahiri, et al. Perturbation bootstrap in adaptive lasso. The
Annals of Statistics, 47(4):2080–2116, 2019.
[20] O. Delalleau and Y. Bengio. Shallow vs. deep sum-product networks. In Advances in
neural information processing systems, pages 666–674, 2011.
[21] L. Devroye, L. Gy¨orﬁ, and G. Lugosi.
A probabilistic theory of pattern recognition,
volume 31. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[22] D. L. Donoho.
De-noising by soft-thresholding.
IEEE transactions on information
theory, 41(3):613–627, 1995.
[23] J. Duchi, E. Hazan, and Y. Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning
and stochastic optimization. Journal of machine learning research, 12(Jul):2121–2159,
2011.
[24] B. Efron, T. Hastie, I. Johnstone, R. Tibshirani, et al. Least angle regression. The
Annals of statistics, 32(2):407–499, 2004.
[25] F. Fan, J. Xiong, and G. Wang. Universal approximation with quadratic deep networks.
Neural Networks, 124:383–392, 2020.
[26] J. Fan and R. Li. Variable selection via nonconcave penalized likelihood and its oracle
properties. Journal of the American statistical Association, 96(456):1348–1360, 2001.
[27] J. Fan and J. Lv. Sure independence screening for ultrahigh dimensional feature space.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 70(5):849–
911, 2008.
[28] Y. Fan and C. Y. Tang.
Tuning parameter selection in high dimensional penalized
likelihood. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology),
75(3):531–552, 2013.
[29] J. Feng and N. Simon. Sparse-input neural networks for high-dimensional nonparametric
regression and classiﬁcation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.07592, 2017.
22
[30] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Regularization paths for generalized linear
models via coordinate descent. Journal of statistical software, 33(1):1, 2010.
[31] E. Gin´e and J. Zinn. Bootstrapping general empirical measures. The Annals of Proba-
bility, pages 851–869, 1990.
[32] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio. Understanding the diﬃculty of training deep feedforward
neural networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence and statistics, pages 249–256, 2010.
[33] L. Gy¨orﬁ, M. Kohler, A. Krzyzak, and H. Walk. A distribution-free theory of nonpara-
metric regression. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[34] H. Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components.
Journal of educational psychology, 24(6):417, 1933.
[35] J. Huang, J. L. Horowitz, and F. Wei. Variable selection in nonparametric additive
models. Annals of statistics, 38(4):2282, 2010.
[36] B. Jiang, T. O’Donnell, and M. Clayards. A deep neural network approach to investigate
tone space in languages. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 145(3):1913–
1913, 2019.
[37] I. T. Jolliﬀe, N. T. Trendaﬁlov, and M. Uddin. A modiﬁed principal component tech-
nique based on the lasso. Journal of computational and Graphical Statistics, 12(3):531–
547, 2003.
[38] H.-J. Kim.
On the ratio of two folded normal distributions.
Communications in
Statistics-Theory and Methods, 35(6):965–977, 2006.
[39] S. C. Kleene. Representation of events in nerve nets and ﬁnite automata. Technical
report, RAND PROJECT AIR FORCE SANTA MONICA CA, 1951.
[40] M. A. Kramer. Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative neural
networks. AIChE journal, 37(2):233–243, 1991.
[41] N. D. Lawrence. A unifying probabilistic perspective for spectral dimensionality reduc-
tion: Insights and new models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(May):1609–
1638, 2012.
[42] I. Lemhadri, F. Ruan, and R. Tibshirani. A neural network with feature sparsity. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1907.12207, 2019.
[43] Y. L. Li, J. Ducey-Wysling, A. D’Hondt, D. Hyun, B. Patel, and J. J. Dahl. Vector ﬂow
imaging using a deep neural network. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
146(4):2901–2902, 2019.
[44] B. Liu, Y. Wei, Y. Zhang, and Q. Yang. Deep neural networks for high dimension, low
sample size data. In IJCAI, pages 2287–2293, 2017.
23
[45] Y. Liu and Y. Wu. Variable selection via a combination of the l 0 and l 1 penalties.
Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 16(4):782–798, 2007.
[46] R. Livni, S. Shalev-Shwartz, and O. Shamir. A provably eﬃcient algorithm for training
deep networks. CoRR, vol. abs/1304.7045, 2013.
[47] G. Marra and S. N. Wood. Practical variable selection for generalized additive models.
Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, 55(7):2372–2387, 2011.
[48] M. Mizumachi and M. Origuchi.
Superdirective non-linear beamforming with deep
neural network. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 140(4):3167–3167,
2016.
[49] B. K. Natarajan. Sparse approximate solutions to linear systems. SIAM journal on
computing, 24(2):227–234, 1995.
[50] K.-S. Oh and K. Jung. Gpu implementation of neural networks. Pattern Recognition,
37(6):1311–1314, 2004.
[51] S. Perkins, K. Lacker, and J. Theiler. Grafting: Fast, incremental feature selection by
gradient descent in function space. Journal of machine learning research, 3(Mar):1333–
1356, 2003.
[52] A. Pinkus. Approximation theory of the mlp model in neural networks. Acta numerica,
8:143–195, 1999.
[53] T. Poggio, H. Mhaskar, L. Rosasco, B. Miranda, and Q. Liao. Why and when can deep-
but not shallow-networks avoid the curse of dimensionality: a review. International
Journal of Automation and Computing, 14(5):503–519, 2017.
[54] S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul.
Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear
embedding. science, 290(5500):2323–2326, 2000.
[55] B. Sch¨olkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. M¨uller. Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel
eigenvalue problem. Neural computation, 10(5):1299–1319, 1998.
[56] G. Schwarz et al.
Estimating the dimension of a model.
The annals of statistics,
6(2):461–464, 1978.
[57] U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, and R. R. Coifman. Provable approximation properties for
deep neural networks. Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, 44(3):537–557,
2018.
[58] J. W. Siegel and J. Xu. On the approximation properties of neural networks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1904.02311, 2019.
[59] N. Simon, J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. A sparse-group lasso. Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics, 22(2):231–245, 2013.
24
[60] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov. Dropout:
a simple way to prevent neural networks from overﬁtting.
The journal of machine
learning research, 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
[61] J. B. Tenenbaum, V. De Silva, and J. C. Langford. A global geometric framework for
nonlinear dimensionality reduction. science, 290(5500):2319–2323, 2000.
[62] A. Tewari, P. K. Ravikumar, and I. S. Dhillon.
Greedy algorithms for structurally
constrained high dimensional problems. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 882–890, 2011.
[63] R. Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 58(1):267–288, 1996.
[64] R. J. Tibshirani. A general framework for fast stagewise algorithms. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 16(1):2543–2588, 2015.
[65] W. S. Torgerson.
Multidimensional scaling: I. theory and method.
Psychometrika,
17(4):401–419, 1952.
[66] W.-J. Tsay, C. J. Huang, T.-T. Fu, and I.-L. Ho. A simple closed-form approximation
for the cumulative distribution function of the composite error of stochastic frontier
models. Journal of Productivity Analysis, 39(3):259–269, 2013.
[67] R. Wang and X. Zhang. Capacity preserving mapping for high-dimensional data visu-
alization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13322, 2019.
[68] S. J. Wright. Coordinate descent algorithms. Mathematical Programming, 151(1):3–34,
2015.
[69] T. T. Wu, K. Lange, et al. Coordinate descent algorithms for lasso penalized regression.
The Annals of Applied Statistics, 2(1):224–244, 2008.
[70] M. Yamada, W. Jitkrittum, L. Sigal, E. P. Xing, and M. Sugiyama. High-dimensional
feature selection by feature-wise kernelized lasso. Neural computation, 26(1):185–207,
2014.
[71] K. Yang and T. Maiti. Ultra high-dimensional generalized additive model: consistency
and tuning parameter selection. Technical report, Michigan State University, 2018.
[72] K. Yang and T. Maiti. Statistical aspects of high-dimensional sparse artiﬁcial neural
network models. Machine learning and knowledge extraction, 2(1):1–19, 2020.
[73] M. Yuan and Y. Lin. Model selection and estimation in regression with grouped vari-
ables.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology),
68(1):49–67, 2006.
[74] C.-H. Zhang and J. Huang.
The sparsity and bias of the lasso selection in high-
dimensional linear regression. The Annals of Statistics, pages 1567–1594, 2008.
25
[75] Y. Zhang, R. Li, and C.-L. Tsai. Regularization parameter selections via generalized
information criterion. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(489):312–
323, 2010.
[76] H. Zou. The adaptive lasso and its oracle properties. Journal of the American statistical
association, 101(476):1418–1429, 2006.
[77] H. Zou and T. Hastie. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal
of the royal statistical society: series B (statistical methodology), 67(2):301–320, 2005.
[78] H. Zou, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Sparse principal component analysis. Journal of
computational and graphical statistics, 15(2):265–286, 2006.
26
Supplementary material: ENNS: Variable Selection,
Regression, Classiﬁcation and Deep Neural Network for
High-Dimensional Data
A
Assumptions and propositions
A.1
Assumptions
The ﬁrst well-known assumption in high-dimensional modeling is sparsity. Here we provide
two versions of sparsity: a stronger version and a weaker version.
These are stated in
assumption 1 and assumption 2 respectively.
Assumption 1 (Sparsity (weak)) The features are sparse, i.e., only s < n = o(p) of the
p variables are strongly related with the response. Speciﬁcally, if y depends on x through a
linear relationship with coeﬃcients β = (β1, ..., βp)T, we have
min
j=1,...,s|βj| ≥γn
and
p
X
j=s+1
|β|j = τn = o(γn)
(18)
where γn is a sequence that may go to zero as n goes to inﬁnity.
Assumption 2 (Sparsity (strong)) The features are sparse, i.e., only s < n = o(p) of
the p variables are related with the response. Speciﬁcally, if y depends on x through a linear
relationship with coeﬃcients β = (β1, ..., βp)T, we have
min
j=1,...,s|βj| ≥γn
and
p
X
j=s+1
|β|j = 0
(19)
where γn is a sequence that may go to zero as n goes to inﬁnity.
We know that in most cases the predictors are dependent, or at least weak correlation
exists. However, even a weak correlation brings great complexity in theory. Therefore, we
assume independent predictors in this section when deriving our theoretical results. However,
extensive simulation studies are performed to show the eﬃcacy of our methodology when
the predictors are correlated. Further, though the theoretical results are proved under this
independent assumption, they can be extended to the assumption that the correlation is up
to o(1).
Assumption 3 (Independence) The predictors in the design matrix satisfy
cor(xj, xk) = 0, 1 ≤j < k ≤p
(20)
The behavior of the design matrix should also be controlled. Here we consider a random
design and assume the following assumption
27
Assumption 4 (Design matrix) The covariate vector x has a continuous density and
there exist constants C1 and C2 such that the density function gj of xj satisﬁes 0 < C1 ≤
gj(x) ≤C2 < ∞on [a, b] for every 1 ≤j ≤p.
As a typical assumption for bagging, we require the bagging sample proportion to be not
too small.
Assumption 5 (Sample proportion) In each bagging round, every sample has qn proba-
bility to be included, where qn satisﬁes
nqn →∞
as n →∞
Note that if we choose the bootstrap sample size to be the same as the sample size n, by law
of large numbers, we have approximately qn = 1 −1/e, where e is the natural number.
A.2
Propositions
The following two propositions considers a scenario that the true underlying relationship
between the predictors and the response is linear, which demonstrates how the probability
of choosing one variable over another in the ﬁrst step is decided. The ﬁrst proposition gives
the probability that we select one variable over another, and the second proposition gives
the probability that we will select a correct variable in the ﬁrst step.
Proposition A.1 Consider the case where y depends on x through a linear structure with
coeﬃcients β1, ..., βp which satisfy assumption 1. Also under assumption 3 and 4, if the sub-
matrix of x consisting of the columns corresponding to the nonzero coeﬃcients is column-wise
orthogonal, let cj be the criterion to select predictor j. Recall that we will select predictor
j if j = arg maxj cj, where cj is the L2 norm of the gradient with respect to the jth input.
Then we have
P(cj < ck) =2L
|βj| −|βk|
√
2σ
, −|βk|
σ , 1
√
2

+ 2L
|βj| + |βk|
√
2σ
, |βk|
σ , 1
√
2

+
Φ
|βj| −|βk|
√
2σ

+ Φ
|βj| + |βk|
√
2σ

−2
(21)
where
L(a, b, ρ) = P(X1 > a, X2 > b)
(22)
is the bivariate orthant probability with correlation ρ and Φ(·) is the standard normal distri-
bution CDF.
Proposition A.2 Under the assumptions 1, 3 and 4, the probability that we select a nonzero
predictor at the very beginning using the stage-wise neural network selection is
P(A nonzero predictor enters the model ﬁrst) =
s
X
k=1
Z ∞
0
fk(x)
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx
(23)
28
where
Fk(x) = 1
2

erf
x + |βk|
√
2σ2

+ erf
x −|βk|
√
2σ2

and
fk(x) = ∂
∂xFk(x) =
r
2
πσ2e−
x2+β2
k
2σ2 cosh βkx
σ2
(24)
and erf(·) is the error function. Moreover, if βmax = maxj=1,...,s is bounded, as s →∞, the
probability is bounded from above
P ≤1 −δ
where δ is a nontrivial quantity.
The proofs of these two propositions are given in Appendix C.
B
Extra Numeric Results
In this section, we present extra simulation results.
B.1
Estimation simulation study
In this subsection, we compare the estimation methods described in section 3.
To fully
understand the estimation diﬀerences among the competitive methods, we assume correct
variable selection and perform the estimation on the correct subset of variables. The data
are generated according to the same scheme as in the last subsection.
We compare the
performance of these diﬀerent estimation methods for s = 2, 5, 10 assuming that we know
the correct subset of variables. The simulation is run on 101 repetitions of data generation
using diﬀerent seeds. In the Table 7, we report the RMSE, the MAE and the MAPE for
regression, and the accuracy, the auc score and the f1 score for classiﬁcation.
On average, we see l1 norm regularization provides best performance, except for the
MAPE when s = 10 in regression. Moreover, we observe that both built-in l1 and soft-
thresholding gives smaller standard errors, which coincides with the shrinkage estimator’s
properties. However, soft-thresholding provides better performance on average than built-in.
The reason is that sparsity is not well supported with most libraries, thus a manual operation
is needed to obtain sparsity.
B.2
Variable selection and estimation
In this subsection, we study the prediction capability of the ENNS algorithm with l1 neural
network, and compare it with the DNP model, the logistic regression and the HSIC-lasso
with SVM. We use the same neural network structure to generate data as in the previous
section. Under 101 repetitions, we report the average RMSE (root mean squared error),
MAE (mean absolute error) and MAPE (mean absolute percent error) for regression and
average accuracy, AUC and F1 Score for classiﬁcation, as well as their standard errors. The
results are summarized in table 8.
29
We observe that our proposed algorithm enjoyed a slight performance boost via the
ensemble method. Moreover, the standard errors of these results are slight greater than the
standard errors reported in the last subsection, where the estimation was done assuming
correct selection. The increase of standard errors is mainly due to the selection variations.
B.3
Correlated predictors
In this subsection, we use an example to study the numerical performance of the proposed
algorithm under correlated predictors situation. We consider two diﬀerent correlations: ρ =
0.3 and ρ = 0.7. As a comparison, the results for ρ = 0 is also included. Let u1, ..., un be
i.i.d. standard normal random variables, xij be i.i.d. standard normal random variables,
which are independent of u1, ..., un. For i = 1, ..., n and j = 1, ..., p, do the transformation
xij = (xij +tui)/
√
1 + t2 for some t, then we obtain the standard normal correlated variables
by
cor(xij, xik) =
t2
1 + t2, i = 1, ..., n; j = 1, ..., p
Taking t =
p
3/7 gives correlation 0.3 and taking t =
p
7/3 gives correlation 0.7. Then
we truncate the random variables to interval [−1, 1]. The structure to generate response is
kept the same as in the last subsection. The results of variable selection and estimation are
provided in table 9.
From the table, we see that the correlated cases perform almost as good as there’s no
correlation. All models select less variables when the correlation is higher, and this is a
well-known symptom of variable selection with correlated predictors. However, this does
not aﬀect the estimation step, and in some cases even this makes the estimation results
better. The reason could be that we have less variables thus the model is simpler. Since
the predictors are correlated, we do not lose too much information by not selecting some of
them. Moreover, some results, not in the table, includes the false positive rate, where the
average for ENNS is 0.05 ± 0.03, while that of the DNP is 0.29 ± 0.14. Therefore, ENNS
includes less redundant variables in the estimation step and achieves better performance.
B.4
Variable selection: MRI data
In this example, we evaluate the proposed variable selection capability and compare it with
other variable selection models in the context of a biological experiment under known ground
truth. The data used in this example come from Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initia-
tives (ADNI), see http://adni.loni.usc.edu/. The data includes n = 265 patients’ neu-
roimaging results, including 164 Alzheimer’s (AD) patients and 101 cognitively normal (CN)
individuals. 145 regions of interest (ROIs) spanning the entire brain were calculated using
Multi-Atlas ROI segmentation, and 114 ROIs were derived by combining single ROIs within a
tree hierarchy to obtain volumetric measurements from larger structures. Therefore, p = 259
ROIs were used in this example.
Details of the pre-processing method can be found at
https://adni.bitbucket.io/reference/docs/UPENN_ROI_MARS/Multi-atlas_ROI_ADNI_Methods_mod
Among those ROIs, biologically important features are picked, see Table 10, where red in-
dicated most important, yellow means second important, and green means third important.
The combinations and all other ROIs are not listed.
30
Table 7: Prediction results on the testing set using neural networks with and without l1
norm regularization for s = 2, 5, 10. RMSE is rooted mean squared error, MAE is mean
absolute error, and MAPE is mean absolute percent error. Accuracy is the percentage of
correct prediction, auc is area under the ROC curve, and f1 score is the inverse of inverse
precision plus the inverse recall.
Response
Metric
Method
s=2
s=5
s=10
Regression
RMSE
Neural Network
31.24(13.32)
69.46(37.40)
136.64(60.54)
Xavier initialization
18.64(11.07)
58.89(27.73)
136.58(65.57)
l1 built-in
20.47(9.62)
59.37(23.61)
129.55(50.48)
l1 soft-thresholding
5.97(4.18)
45.83(33.06)
109.31(47.24)
Stage-wise
10.59(11.20)
47.64(22.69)
117.65(43.96)
Bagging
25.48(10.89)
59.49(26.53)
133.45(59.72)
MAE
Neural Network
16.45(10.91)
52.85(28.47)
103.76(45.99)
Xavier initialization
13.65(8.06)
45.34(22.18)
105.17(53.66)
l1 built-in
15.56(7.76)
45.32(18.34)
98.54(38.36)
l1 soft-thresholding
4.37(3.02)
35.49(26.21)
83.85(36.45)
Stage-wise
7.91(8.23)
38.86(20.00)
89.82(33.82)
Bagging
14.77(7.92)
43.16(20.51)
99.38(41.66)
MAPE
Neural Network
0.012(0.015)
0.030(0.026)
0.033(0.026)
Xavier initialization
0.009(0.009)
0.027(0.022)
0.029(0.017)
l1 built-in
0.011(0.012)
0.029(0.023)
0.032(0.021)
l1 soft-thresholding
0.005(0.007)
0.017(0.010)
0.029(0.023)
Stage-wise
0.007(0.007)
0.019(0.015)
0.027(0.016)
Bagging
0.010(0.010)
0.026(0.024)
0.030(0.022)
Classiﬁcation
Accuracy
Neural Network
0.944(0.026)
0.886(0.037)
0.841(0.041)
Xavier initialization
0.952(0.026)
0.891(0.034)
0.831(0.036)
l1 built-in
0.927(0.031)
0.844(0.085)
0.752(0.110)
l1 soft-thresholding
0.964(0.028)
0.908(0.029)
0.855(0.031)
Stage-wise
0.945(0.030)
0.886(0.038)
0.804(0.042)
Bagging
0.877(0.069)
0.806(0.068)
0.753(0.087)
AUC
Neural Network
0.942(0.027)
0.882(0.038)
0.837(0.042)
Xavier initialization
0.951(0.027)
0.891(0.034)
0.825(0.037)
l1 built-in
0.924(0.031)
0.833(0.100)
0.734(0.123)
l1 soft-thresholding
0.964(0.029)
0.905(0.029)
0.851(0.032)
Stage-wise
0.943(0.031)
0.884(0.038)
0.800(0.041)
Bagging
0.877(0.065)
0.803(0.063)
0.751(0.084)
F1 Score
Neural Network
0.943(0.027)
0.887(0.045)
0.841(0.049)
Xavier initialization
0.952(0.026)
0.892(0.041)
0.832(0.048)
l1 built-in
0.927(0.031)
0.824(0.192)
0.732(0.200)
l1 soft-thresholding
0.965(0.026)
0.908(0.036)
0.857(0.033)
Stage-wise
0.944(0.031)
0.883(0.042)
0.806(0.049)
Bagging
0.870(0.077)
0.792(0.060)
0.748(0.088)
31
Table 8: Model performance of the combination of ENNS algorithm and l1 thresholding esti-
mation, compared with DNP, Lasso and HSIC-Lasso for s = 2, 5, 10 cases in both regression
and classiﬁcation. The average performance of 101 repetitions with their standard errors in
parenthesis are presented.
Response
Metric
Method
s=2
s=5
s=10
Regression
RMSE
ENNS+l1
15.67(30.35)
48.14(21.16)
174.08(65.38)
DNP
25.42(33.16)
62.63(29.02)
178.91(60.15)
Lasso
79.44(67.31)
104.19(49.38)
192.04(77.34)
HSIC-Lasso
56.32(59.41)
86.77(47.51)
188.35(56.48)
MAE
ENNS+l1
12.03(23.68)
40.12(19.95)
132.07(44.99)
DNP
20.15(27.15)
47.85(22.31)
136.06(45.95)
Lasso
64.11(54.63)
81.97(39.76)
147.86(60.21)
HSIC-Lasso
42.89(34.66)
70.04(41.23)
144.37(48.15)
MAPE
ENNS+l1
0.012(0.025)
0.028(0.036)
0.041(0.037)
DNP
0.017(0.028)
0.032(0.032)
0.042(0.041)
Lasso
0.042(0.029)
0.046(0.035)
0.046(0.025)
HSIC-Lasso
0.033(0.021)
0.036(0.025)
0.048(0.024)
Classiﬁcation
Accuracy
ENNS+l1
0.967(0.029)
0.848(0.025)
0.756(0.067)
DNP
0.933(0.076)
0.822(0.068)
0.736(0.064)
Lasso
0.732(0.103)
0.726(0.071)
0.692(0.075)
HSIC-Lasso
0.805(0.094)
0.798(0.094)
0.706(0.081)
AUC
ENNS+l1
0.959(0.036)
0.834(0.024)
0.709(0.058)
DNP
0.898(0.148)
0.780(0.100)
0.699(0.052)
Lasso
0.652(0.121)
0.640(0.102)
0.625(0.068)
HSIC-Lasso
0.774(0.125)
0.748(0.121)
0.677(0.061)
F1-Score
ENNS+l1
0.962(0.037)
0.859(0.036)
0.708(0.089)
DNP
0.903(0.208)
0.761(0.199)
0.705(0.100)
Lasso
0.590(0.299)
0.604(0.250)
0.634(0.192)
HSIC-Lasso
0.744(0.206)
0.731(0.242)
0.666(0.208)
32
Table 9: Selection and estimation comparison for predictors with correlation 0, 0.3 and 0.7.
The number of nonzero predictors is set to 5. For selection, the average number of correct
selected variables with its standard error is given. For estimation the average RMSE or AUC
with their standard errors is given. The results are averaged over 101 repetitions.
Response
Model
selection
ρ = 0.0
ρ = 0.3
ρ = 0.7
Regression
ENNS+l1
3.81(0.79)
3.27(0.75)
2.29(0.70)
DNP
3.48(0.96)
2.95(0.79)
2.14(0.56)
LASSO
3.38(0.90)
2.85(0.79)
2.11(1.12)
Classiﬁcation
ENNS+l1
3.66(1.05)
3.25(0.76)
2.38(0.72)
DNP
3.62(1.09)
3.43(0.91)
2.71(1.03)
LASSO
3.55(0.79)
2.90(1.31)
1.95(0.72)
Response
Model
estimation
ρ = 0.0
ρ = 0.3
ρ = 0.7
Regression
ENNS+l1
40.82(19.46)
37.17(27.29)
43.18(44.47)
DNP
81.43(46.00)
92.91(65.25)
101.15(90.63)
LASSO
131.37(74.22)
151.16(108.88)
113.30(97.54)
Classiﬁcation
ENNS+l1
0.856(0.040)
0.875(0.061)
0.907(0.030)
DNP
0.774(0.100)
0.766(0.106)
0.793(0.092)
LASSO
0.598(0.083)
0.634(0.117)
0.683(0.116)
The full data set is used for variable selection, and the selection result is based on a
3-fold cross-validation sets. We run the ENNS algorithm along with the LASSO and the
DNP. The selection results are presented in Table 10. Note here if a model selects a simple
combination of some features, these features are also marked as selected. Moreover, Table
11 shows the number of combined features selected for the models and the number of false
positive selections. We observe that LASSO misses a lot of important features and selected
about only one-fourth of the combined features as neural networks. This indicates that the
features may have a complicated relationship with the response. ENNS performs better than
the shallow DNP in terms of the metrics in table 11, where IS is a weighted average score
with the weights for red, yellow and green being 3, 2 and 1, respectively; NI is the number of
selected important variables; and NU is the number of selected unimportant variables. As a
property of the ENNS, it selects relatively less number of false positive variables. It’s hard
to track the combined features, since a lot is involved, however, the combinations represent
biological intuitions. Neural network selects more combined features and perform better in
this sense.
C
Proof
In this section, we will provide the proof of the theorems in section 4.
33
Table 10: Variable selection result for the AD data.
The table includes all biologically
important variables with three levels: red (very important), yellow (secondly important)
and green (thirdly important). The non-important variables are not included in the model.
Checkmarks indicate whether the corresponding algorithm selected the variable or not.
Gene code
R31
R32
R36
R37
R38
R39
R40
R41
R47
R48
R49
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R50
R51
R52
R55
R56
R57
R58
R59
R60
R81
R82
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R85
R86
R87
R88
R100
R101
R102
R103
R106
R107
R116
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R117
R118
R119
R120
R121
R122
R123
R124
R125
R132
R133
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R136
R137
R138
R139
R140
R141
R142
R143
R146
R147
R152
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R153
R154
R155
R162
R163
R164
R165
R166
R167
R168
R169
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R170
R171
R178
R179
R186
R187
R190
R191
R194
R195
R198
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Gene code
R199
R200
R201
R202
R203
R204
R205
R206
R207
Lasso
✓
✓
✓
DNP
✓
✓
✓
✓
ENNS
✓
✓
✓
✓
34
Table 11: Variable selection result for the AD data. The reported numbers include IS, the
weighted average of selected important variables with the weights being 3, 2 and 1 for red
(most important), yellow (secondly important) and green (thirdly important), respectively;
NI, number of important variables selected; and NU, number of unimportant variables se-
lected.
Variable selection method
IS
NI
NU
LASSO
1.094
32/86
25/59
DNP
1.428
40/86
15/59
ENNS
1.624
49/86
6/59
Proof of Proposition A.1
Proof:
Consider independent observations {(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}. Assume
x(j) ∼N (0, I),
j = 1, ..., p
In the regression set up where y is centered, we have
y|x1, ..., xp ∼N (β1x1 + ... + βpxp, σ2).
Without loss of generality, we assume that
|β1| ≥|β2| ≥... ≥|βs|
otherwise, we may re-arrange the order of columns of the design matrix.
Furthermore,
without loss of generality, we may assume all coeﬃcients are positive, otherwise, we may
multiply the corresponding column of the design matrix by −1.
Since s < n, we may
without loss of generality consider an orthogonal design on the matrix x(S), which can be
achieved by re-parametrization. Let ˆS be the set of variables included in the current model.
The algorithm computes
G0j =
∂
∂W 0j
l(θ; X, y) := (G0j1, ..., G0jK)
where K is the size of the ﬁrst hidden layer. Without loss of generality, we may consider
a shallow network in this part, since there isn’t any predictor x involved in this section, all
estimates can be treated as constants, which are universal for all j′s. We have
G0jk = −2
n
n
X
i=1
yiˆakσ′(
p
X
j=1
xij ˆθjk + ˆtk)xij,
k = 1, ..., K
where ˆak, ˆtk are estimated parameters for the initial model and ˆθjk is set to zero for all input
variables at the very beginning. Thus we have
∥G0j∥2 =
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
[−2
n
n
X
i=1
yiˆakσ′(
p
X
j=1
xij ˆθjk + ˆtk)xij]2
= 2
n
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
kσ′(ˆtk)|xT
(j)y|
35
Since the leading constant is independent of j, it’s easier to consider the diﬀerent part,
denoted
cj = |xT
(j)y|
for j ∈C, where C is the candidate set. The ﬁrst variable selected is
j+ = arg max
j∈C
cj.
At the very beginning, we have for x ≥0 that
P(c1 ≤x) = P
 |xT
(1)y| ≤x

= P
 −x ≤xT
(1)y ≤x

= P
 −x ≤β1 + xT
(1)ε ≤x

= Φ
 x −β1
σ∥x(1)∥2

−Φ
−x −β1
σ∥x(1)∥2

= Φ
x −β1
σ

−Φ
−x −β1
σ

(25)
This result implies that greater β leads to higher probability of large c1. Then
P(c1 > c2) = P
 |xT
(1)y| > |xT
(2)y|

(26)
Let
W1 = xT
(1)y
and
W2 = xT
(2)y
(27)
which are both normally distributed. Therefore, c1 and c2 follow folded normal distribution
c1 ∼FN(β1, σ2)
and
c2 ∼FN(β2, σ2)
(28)
We can calculate
Cov(W1, W2) = Cov(β1 + xT
(1)y, β2 + xT
(2)y) = σ2xT
(1)x(2) = 0
(29)
Because both W1 and W2 are normally distributed, W1 and W2 are independent. Therefore,
c1 and c2 are independent. Since both c1 and c2 are positive, the probability is equivalent to
P(c1 > c2) = P
c1
c2
> 1

(30)
Let
c12 = c1
c2
Then we have
c12 ∼RN(β1, β2, σ2, σ2)
(31)
36
where RN stands for the ratio of folded normal distributions. By theorem 3.1 in [38], we
have the CDF of c12
F12(x) =2L
 β1 −β2x
σ
√
1 + x2, −β2
σ ,
x
√
1 + x2

+ 2L
 β1 + β2x
σ
√
1 + x2, β2
σ ,
x
√
1 + x2

+
Φ
 β1 −β2x
σ
√
1 + x2

+ Φ
 β1 + β2x
σ
√
1 + x2

−2
(32)
where
L(a, b, ρ) = P(X1 > a, X2 > b)
(33)
with
X1
X2

∼N

0,
1
ρ
ρ
1

Then we have
P(c1 < c2) = F12(1)
= 2L
β1 −β2
√
2σ , −β2
σ , 1
√
2

+ 2L
β1 + β2
√
2σ , β2
σ , 1
√
2

+
Φ
β1 −β2
√
2σ

+ Φ
β1 + β2
√
2σ

−2
(34)
Release the general assumption of βj > 0 by multiply −1 to those which are negative, we have
the absolute values back on |βj|. This is also true for diﬀerent βi and βj, since we did not use
the diﬀerence between the nonzero predictors and zero predictors. By the exchangeability
of predictors, the result holds for all i and j. Therefore, we have
P(cj < ck) =2L
|βj| −|βk|
√
2σ
, −|βk|
σ , 1
√
2

+ 2L
|βj| + |βk|
√
2σ
, |βk|
σ , 1
√
2

+
Φ
|βj| −|βk|
√
2σ

+ Φ
|βj| + |βk|
√
2σ

−2
□
Proof of Proposition A.2
Proof:
Consider independent observations {(x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn)}. Assume
x(j) ∼N (0, I),
j = 1, ..., p
In the regression set up where y is centered, we have
y|x1, ..., xp ∼N (β1x1 + ... + βpxp, σ2).
Without loss of generality, we assume that
|β1| ≥|β2| ≥... ≥|βs|
37
otherwise, we may re-arrange the order of columns of the design matrix.
Furthermore,
without loss of generality, we may assume all coeﬃcients are positive, otherwise, we may
multiply the corresponding column of the design matrix by −1.
Since s < n, we may
without loss of generality consider an orthogonal design on the matrix x(S), which can be
achieved by re-parametrization. Let ˆS be the set of variables included in the current model.
At the very beginning, we have proved in the proof of proposition A.1 that
cj ∼FN(βj, σ2)
j = 1, ..., p
(35)
and that ci and cj are independent for i ̸= j. Denote event
Ek = {ck > max
i̸=k ci}, k = 1, ..., s
(36)
It’s easy to observe that Ek’s are mutually exclusive. Therefore, we have
Pr(At least one of c1, ..., cs is greater than all of cs+1, ..., cp)
=Pr
 s[
k=1
Ek
!
=
s
X
k=1
Pr(Ek)
(37)
We may calculate
Pr(Ek) = Pr(ck > c(−k,p−1))
where c(−k,p−1) is the largest order statistic of c1, ...c(k−1), c(k+1), c(p), which is independent of
ck. Let F(−k,p−1) and f(−k,p−1) be the CDF and PDF of c(−k,p−1), respectively, we have
F(−k,p−1)(x) =
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)
and
f(−k,p−1)(x) = ∂
∂x
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)
where from the properties of folded normal distribution we have
Fk(x) = 1
2

erf
x + |βk|
√
2σ2

+ erf
x −|βk|
√
2σ2

and
fk(x) = ∂
∂xFk(x) =
r
2
πσ2e−
x2+β2
k
2σ2 cosh βkx
σ2
38
Then we have
Pr(Ek)
=Pr(ck > c(−k,p−1))
=
Z ∞
0
Pr(ck > x)f(−k,p−1)(x)dx
=
Z ∞
0
[1 −Fk(x)] ∂
∂x
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx
=
"
[1 −Fk(x)]
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)
#
∞
0
+
Z ∞
0
fk(x)
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx
=
Z ∞
0
fk(x)
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx
(38)
where the second equality is by the convolution formula, the fourth equality is by integration
by parts. Therefore,
Pr(At least one of c1, ..., cm is greater than all of cs+1, ..., cp)
=
s
X
k=1
Z ∞
0
fk(x)
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx
(39)
Next we will show that this probability is actually a very high probability. Let
pk =
Z ∞
0
fk(x)
p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(x)dx = Ek
" p
Y
j̸=k
Fj(X)
#
By the formulas for Fk and fk, we have
pk =
Z ∞
0
r
2
πσ2e−
x2+β2
k
2σ2 cosh βkx
σ2
Y
j̸=k
1
2

erf
x + βj
√
2σ2

+ erf
x −βj
√
2σ2

dx
=
Z ∞
0
r
1
2πσ2

e−(x+βk)2
2σ2
+ e−(x−βk)2
2σ2
 Y
j̸=k
1
2

erf
x + βj
√
2σ2

+ erf
x −βj
√
2σ2

dx
(40)
Do change of variable z = x/σ, we have
pk =
Z ∞
0
1
√
2π

e−
(z+ βk
σ )2
2
+ e−
(z−βk
σ )2
2
 Y
j̸=k
1
2
"
erf
 
z + βj
σ
√
2
!
+ erf
 
z −βj
σ
√
2
!#
dz
(41)
39
Let ˜βk = βk/σ, without loss of generality, assume that ∞= β0 ≥β1 ≥... ≥βp ≥βp+1 = 0,
we have
pk =
Z ∞
0
1
√
2π

e−(z+ ˜βk)2
2
+ e−(z−˜βk)2
2
 Y
j̸=k
1
2
"
erf
 
z + ˜βj
√
2
!
+ erf
 
z −˜βj
√
2
!#
dz
=
p
X
i=0
Z βi
βi+1
1
√
2π

e−(z+ ˜βk)2
2
+ e−(z−˜βk)2
2

Y
j̸=k
1
2
"
erf
 
z + ˜βj
√
2
!
+
1{j≥i+1}erf
 
z −˜βj
√
2
!
−
1{j≤i}erf
 ˜βj −z
√
2
!#
dz
(42)
By the exponential approximation of the error function, see for example [66], there exist c1
and c2 such that
sup
x>0 |erf(x) −(1 −exp[−c1x −c2x2])|
can be arbitrarily small, where approximately c1 ≈1.095 and c2 ≈0.7565. Consider this
approximation, we have
pk =
p
X
i=0
Z βi
βi+1
1
√
2π

e−(z+ ˜βk)2
2
+ e−(z−˜βk)2
2

Y
j̸=k
1
2

1 +
1{j≥i+1} −
1{j≤i} −e
c2
1
4c2

e
−c2
2
h
z+

˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
+ 1{j≥i+1}e
−c2
2
h
z+

−˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
−
1{j≤i}e
−c2
2
h
z−

˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
(43)
Here
e
c2
1
4c2 ≈1.48 >> 1
Observe that as when i = s, also observe that τn →0 indicates maxj=s+1,...,p βj →0, we have
s
Y
j=1,j̸=k
1
2e
c2
1
4c2

e
−c2
2
h
z−

βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
−e
−c2
2
h
z+

βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
→0 as s →∞
Therefore, the formula of pk can be simpliﬁed to
pk = o
 1
2se
sc2
1
4c2

+
s
X
i=0
Z βi
βi+1
1
√
2π

e−(z+ ˜βk)2
2
+ e−(z−˜βk)2
2

Y
j̸=k
1
2

1 +
1{j≥i+1} −
1{j≤i} −e
c2
1
4c2

e
−c2
2
h
z+

˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
+ 1{j≥i+1}e
−c2
2
h
z+

−˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
−
1{j≤i}e
−c2
2
h
z−

˜βj+
c1
√
2c2
i2
≤o
 1
2se
sc2
1
4c2

+
s
X
i=0
1
2e
c2
1
4c2
s−i 1
2s
h
Φ(˜βi −˜βk) −Φ(˜βi+1 −˜βk) + Φ(˜βi + ˜βk) −Φ(˜βi+1 + ˜βk)
i
(44)
40
where Φ is the normal CDF and the inequality is by observing
e−x2 ≤1
and the term in the bracket is less than 2 when j ≥i+1. Then summing up p′
ks and observing
the double sum is not converging to zero since it consists of a geometric component, when
βmax is not big enough and let s →∞, we have
1 −
s
X
k=1
pk
≥1 −o

s 1
2se
sc2
1
4c2

−
s
X
k=1
s
X
i=0
1
2e
c2
1
4c2
s−i
1
2s
h
Φ(˜βi −˜βk) −Φ(˜βi+1 −˜βk) + Φ(˜βi + ˜βk) −Φ(˜βi+1 + ˜βk)
i
≥
s
X
i=1
1
2e
c2
1
4c2
s−i
s
X
k=1
1
2s(1 −Φ(βmax)) −o

s 1
2se
sc2
1
4c2

≥c −o(1)
(45)
□
Proof of Theorem 4.1
Proof:
In this proof, we will show the probability that the same zero predictor appears in
k bagging rounds tends to zero as k increases. At the ﬁrst step, we have C = {1, ..., p} and
S = {}. By proposition A.2 we know that the probability that the ﬁrst variable belongs to
S0 converges to one under the conditions.
At the mth step, denote the candidate set Cm and the selected set Sm. Assume that
S ⊂S0. Without loss of generality, consider σ2 = 1. If not, we may divide the response and
coeﬃcients by σ. Consider the ﬁrst case that
Cm ∩S0 ̸= ∅
Let Cm ∩S0 = {j1, ..., js′}. By the proof of proposition A.2, the probability that a zero
variable is selected is at most
P(select zero variable) ≤1 −
P
j∈Cm∩S0 eβj
P
j∈Cm eβj
= 1 −
P
j∈Cm∩S0 eβj
P
j∈Cm∩S0 eβj + P
j∈Cm∩SC
0 eβj
=
P
j∈Cm∩SC
0 eβj
P
j∈Cm∩S0 eβj + P
j∈Cm∩SC
0 eβj
≤
(|Cm| −s′)eτn
s′eγn + (|Cm| −s′)
41
where |Cm| = O(p) is the cardinality of Cm by theorem condition, βmin = minj=1,...,s βj,
βmax = maxj=1,...,s βj and by assumption 1
τn = o(γn) ≤o(βmin)
If we have
|Cm| −s′
s′
eτn−γn →0 as n →∞
(46)
Then we have
P(select zero variable) →0 as n →∞
In this case, the probability of false positive in the ENNS algorithm goes to zero. However,
it is not always that equation 46 is satisﬁed. It happens that the signal strength of nonzero
variable is not big enough. This case can be combined with the other case that
Cm ∩S0 = ∅
In this case, it is (almost) guaranteed that a zero variable will be selected in the next step.
However, we will show that though a zero variable is selected, as long as the number of zero
variable in S is not too big, which is guaranteed by the theorem condition
s0 ≤Cs = o(p)
the selected zero variables in diﬀerent rounds of the bagging algorithm together with the neu-
ral network random initialization make the probability that the same zero variables appears
more than the threshold number of times converges to zero. Now we have
Cm = {j1, ..., jp′} ⊂{s + 1, ..., p}
Consider the scenario that all bagging rounds are independent. The residual
y −ˆµSm
is not related to xj1, ..., xj′p by assumption 2, where Sm is the selected set at the mth step
and ˆµSm is the estimated conditional expectation of y given xSm. Therefore, the variables
xj, j ∈Cm are exchangeable. We have
P(j ∈Sm+1 ∩Cm) = P
 
1
B2
B2
X
b=1
1{cj≥c(s0−|Sm|)} ≥ps
!
=
B2
X
k=[B2ps]
B2
k
(s0 −|Sm|)k (p −s0)B2−k
(p −|Sm|)B2
≤exp

−B2

(1 −ps) log
(1 −ps)(p −|Sm|)
p −s0

+ ps log
ps(p −|Sm|)
s0 −|Sm|

(47)
where the last inequality is by [3]. Since we have
s0 ≤Cs = o(p)
42
then we have
P
 j ∈Sm+1 ∩Cm
→0
as
s and B2 →∞
Consider the last case that there is at least one variable in Cm that is also in {1, ..., s} and
equation 46 does not hold. Also consider the truth that the bagging rounds are not fully
independent in practice. Consider variable j and the estimator
ˆsm
j =
1{∥Gmj∥2≤tm}
Conditioning on the observations, there exist a ﬁxed tm such that ˆsm
j
indicates whether
variable j is not selected (= 1) or selected (= 0). The bagged estimator is deﬁned as
ˆsm
j,B = E
h
1{∥G∗
mj∥2≤tm}
i
where G∗
mj is Gmj evaluated on a bootstrap sample. By the uniform law of large numbers,
see for example [33], we have
sup
x,y

1
B2
B2
X
b=1
1{∥G∗
mj,b∥2≤tm} −E
h
1{∥G∗
mj∥2≤tm}
i →0
as B2 →∞
(48)
Let PB
n be the empirical measure of the bootstrap sample. It’s easy to verify that ˆsm
j
is
a smooth function evaluated at PB
n . By assumption 3, we have independent observations.
Then according to [31], see also [9], there exist an increasing sequence {bn}n∈N such that
bn(∥Gmj∥2 −c0) →N (0, σ2
∞)
for some constant c0 < ∞and σ2
∞< ∞. By algebra, in the mth step, we have
∥Gmj∥2 =
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
[−2
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆµi)ˆakσ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)xij]2
= 2
n
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k
h
ˆεTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)
i2
(49)
where in ˆθk, ˆθjk is estimated from data for j ∈Sm and ˆθjk equals zero for j ∈Cm, ˆµi is
the neural network estimate of yi based on xSm, ˆε is the prediction error based on xSm,
Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk) is a diagonal matrix consists of σ′(·) evaluated at xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk and x(j) is the
jth column of x. We have
ˆε = y −ˆf(ˆθ,ˆt, ˆa,ˆb, xSm)
=
X
j∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βjx(j) +


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjx(j) −ˆf(ˆθ,ˆt, ˆa,ˆb, xSm)

+ ε
=
X
j∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βjx(j) + ε + O
 
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!
(50)
43
Therefore, for j ∈Cm ∩{1, ..., s}, since x(j) is normalized and σ′(·) ≤1, by norm inequality,
we have
E∥Gmj∥2 ≈E


2
n
v
u
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k


X
j′∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βj′xT
(j′)Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j) + εTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)


2


≥E

2
nK
K
X
k=1
|ˆak|

X
j′∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βj′xT
(j′)Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j) + εTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)



≥c · |Cm ∩{1, ..., s}|
nK
γn
(51)
For j ∈Cm ∩{s + 1, ..., p}, by Jensen’s inequality, we have
E∥Gmj∥2 ≈E


2
n
v
u
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k


X
j′∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βj′xT
(j′)Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j) + εTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)


2


≤2
n
v
u
u
u
tE



K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k


X
j′∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βj′xT
(j′)Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j) + εTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)


2


≤
c′
n
√
K
(52)
If γn ≥c′√
K
c
, we have
P

min
j∈Cm∩{1,...,s}E∥Gmj∥2 ≥
max
j∈Cm∩{s+1,...,p}E∥Gmj∥2

→1
Since we have s0 ≤Cs = o(p), taking tm to be the (|Cm| −|Sm|)th smallest value of
∥Gmj∥2, j ∈Cm, combine this with equation 48, for j ∈Cm ∩{s + 1, ..., p}, we have
1
B2
B2
X
b=1
1{∥G∗
mj,b∥2≤tm} ≤E
h
1{∥G∗
mj∥2≤tm}
i
+ ǫ →Φ
bn(tm −c0)
σ∞
−Z

as n and B2 →∞
(53)
where the result is by [9], Z is standard normal random variable and Φ(·) is the standard
normal CDF. Observe that bn is a diverging sequence and s0 ≤Cs = o(p), then we have the
44
probability that a zero variable is selected
P
 j ∈Cm ∩Sm+1c ∩{s + 1, ..., p}

=P
 j ∈Cm ∩Sm+1c ∩{s + 1, ..., p}
 E∥Gmj∥2 ≤tm

P (E∥Gmj∥2 ≤tm)
+ P
 j ∈Cm ∩Sm+1c ∩{s + 1, ..., p}
 E∥Gmj∥2 ≥tm

P (E∥Gmj∥2 ≥tm)
≤P
 j ∈Cm ∩Sm+1c ∩{s + 1, ..., p}
 E∥Gmj∥2 ≤tm

+ P (E∥Gmj∥2 ≥tm)
≈1 −Φ
bn(tm −E∥Gmj∥2)
σ∞
−Z

+ s0 −|Sm| −|Cm ∩{1, ..., s}|
p −|Sm|
→0
as n →∞and B2 →∞
(54)
Therefore, the false positive rate of the ENNS algorithm goes to zero.
In the classiﬁcation set up, we have similarly for equation 49 that
∥Gmj∥2 =
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
[−1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆµi)ˆakσ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)xij]2
= 1
n
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k
h
ˆεTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)
i2
(55)
where in ˆθk, ˆθjk is estimated from data for j ∈Sm and ˆθjk equals zero for j ∈Cm, ˆµi is the
neural network estimate of the mean of yi based on xSm, i.e.
ˆµi = σ
 K
X
k=1
ˆαkσ(θT
k xi + tk) + b
!
,
ˆε is the prediction error based on xSm, Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk) is a diagonal matrix consists of σ′(·)
evaluated at xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk and x(j) is the jth column of x. The only diﬀerence between the
regression set up and the classiﬁcation set up is the formula for the mean.
Use Taylor
expansion with Lagrange remainder, we have
σ
 
s
X
j=1
βjxj
!
=σ


X
j∈Cm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj

+ σ′


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj


X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj
for some ξ ∈(0, 1) and
0 < σ′


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj

< σ


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj

< 1
Then
ˆε = ε + σ′


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj


X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj + O
 
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!
45
where ε is the theoretical error of Bernoulli distribution with their means. We don’t have a
direct control on ε, but by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality we have for any δ > 0 that
P
1
n
εTΣ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)x(j)
 > δ

≤P
1
n max
i
Σ′(xT
i ˆθk + ˆtk)
ε∥2∥x(j)∥2
 > δ

≤P
1
n ∥ε∥2 > δ

≤e−nδ2/8
(56)
Therefore, the only diﬀerence between classiﬁcation and regression is the ﬁrst order approx-
imation term
σ′


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj


Observe that this term only depends on the true relationship and is independent of any
j ∈Cm, therefore can be treated as a constant when comparing ∥Gmj∥2. This ﬁnishes the
proof for the classiﬁcation case.
□
Proof of Theorem 4.2
Proof:
In the proof of theorem 4.1, we have proved that with probability tending to 1, the
algorithm won’t select any zero variables. Therefore, here it suﬃces to show that the model
will be able to include all nonzero variables in the model. Though it looks complicated, we
only need to consider the worst case:
Sm = {1, ..., s −1}
and
Cm = {s, s + 1, ..., p}
and prove that variable s will be selected in the next step, since variable s has the smallest
true coeﬃcient βs among {1, ..., s} and thus all other cases have greater probability to selected
a nonzero variable. Note variable s will be selected
s ∈Sm+1
⇐⇒
∥Gms∥2 = max
j∈Cm ∥Gmj∥2
Now we have
∥Gmj∥2 = 2
n
v
u
u
t
K
X
k=1
ˆa2
k
h
ˆεTΣ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)x(j)
i2
where xs−1i is the ﬁrst s −1th elements in xi, ˆθ
s−1
k
is estimated from data as the coeﬃcient
of xs−1
i
, ˆµi is the neural network estimate of yi based on xs−1, ˆε is the prediction error based
on xs−1, Σ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ˆtk) is a diagonal matrix consists of σ′(·) evaluated at xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ˆtk
and x(j) is the jth column of x.
46
Here we need the probability that ∥Gms∥2 being the greatest among all candidates to be
very big, so that it will not be missed in the ensemble ﬁltering. For j ∈{s + 1, ..., p}, we
have
P (∥Gms∥2 > ∥Gmj∥2)
=P
 K
X
k=1
ˆα2
k
h
ˆεTΣ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)x(s)
i2
>
K
X
k=1
ˆα2
k
h
ˆεTΣ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)x(j)
i2
!
=P
 K
X
k=1

ˆεT ˆαkΣ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)x(s)
2
−

ˆεT ˆαkΣ′(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)x(s)
2
> 0
!
(57)
In the regression set up, observe that
max
i
Σ′
ii(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk) = max
i
σ(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)
1 + exp(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk)
≤max
i
σ(xs−1
i
T ˆθ
s−1
k
+ ˆtk) ≤1
and
ˆε = βsx(s) + ε + O
 
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!
Also by the fact that
A =⇒B
=⇒
P(A) ≤P(B)
we have for regression that
P (∥Gms∥2 > ∥Gmj∥2)
=P
 K
X
k=1
 βsx(s) + ε
T Σkx(s)
2
−
 βsx(s) + ε
T Σkx(j)
2
≥O
 
KK2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!!
=P
 K
X
k=1
h
β2
s
h xT
(s)Σkx(s)
2 −
 xT
(s)Σkx(j)
2i
+ 2βs

xT
(s)Σx(s)εT Σ(x(s) −x(j))

+
h εTΣx(s)
2 −
 εTΣx(j)
2ii
≥O
 
KK2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!!
≥P
 K
X
k=1
h
c′βs

εTΣ(x(s) −x(j))

+
h εTΣx(s)
2 −
 εTΣx(j)
2ii
≥
−cKβ2
s + O
 
KK2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!!
(58)
Observe by assumption 3 that x(s) and x(j) are independent and identically distributed, we
have
P
 εTΣx(s)
2 >
 εTΣx(j)
2
= 1
2
47
Therefore, we have
P (∥Gms∥2 > ∥Gmj∥2)
≥P
 
c′βs

εTΣ(x(s) −x(j))

+
h εTΣx(s)
2 −
 εTΣx(j)
2i
≥−cβ2
s + O
 
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!!K
→Φ

cβs
∥Σ(x(s) −x(j))∥2
K
≥(1 −δn)1/(p−s)
as n →∞
(59)
under the theorem conditions for some asymptotically negligible sequence δn > 0. Then
consider the bagging process, similar to 54, according to theorem 6 in [6], we have
P
 s /∈Cm ∩Sm+1 ∩Cm+1c
=P
 
1
B2
B2
X
b=1
1{∥Gms∥2̸=maxj∈Cm ∥Gmj∥2} ≥1 −pr
!
≤
1
1 −pr
E
"
1
B2
B2
X
b=1
1{∥Gms∥2̸=maxj∈Cm ∥Gmj∥2}
#
≤
δn
1 −pr
→0
as n →∞and B2 →∞
(60)
where the ﬁrst inequality is by Markov’s inequality, and the second inequality is by 59.
Therefore, the probability that variable s will not enter the model in the next step tends to
zero, thus with probability tending to 1, all nonzero variables are selected in the regression
set up.
Consider the classiﬁcation case, we have the same as in regression but
ˆε = ε + σ′


X
j∈Sm∩{1,...,s}
βjxj + ξ
X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj


X
j∈{1,...,s}/Sm
βjxj + O
 
K2
n
r
log(nKn)
n
!
by the proof of theorem 4.1, where ε is the theoretical error of Bernoulli distribution with
their means. Here we no longer have the normality and have an extra term σ′ which can be
treated as constant in this step, but by the central limit theorem we have
√n(x(s) −x(j))TΣεT ⇒N(0, V )
where V is bounded by assumption 4 and the fact that Σ is diagonal with the largest element
less than 1. Feeding this back into 59, we have
P(∥Gms∥2 > ∥Gmj∥2) ≥(1 −δ′n)1/(p−s)
where δ′
n is greater than δn up to a factor of constant but still converges to zero as n →∞,
under theorem conditions. Then similar to 60, we have
P
 s /∈Cm ∩Sm+1 ∩Cm+1c
≤
δ′
n
1 −pr
→0
as n →∞and B2 →∞
This ﬁnishes the proof for the classiﬁcation case.
□
48
Proof of Theorem 4.3
Proof:
In this subsection, we prove the estimation and prediction of regression and classi-
ﬁcation, respectively. In the regression set up, under assumption 2, we have
y = f(x) + ǫ = f(xS) + ǫ
We have
P

E
Z
|fn(x ˆS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx) →0

=P

E
Z
|fn(x ˆS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx) →0
 ˆS = S

P

ˆS = S

+ P

E
Z
|fn(x ˆS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx) →0
 ˆS ̸= S

P

ˆS ̸= S

≥P

E
Z
|fn(x ˆS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx) →0
 ˆS = S

P

ˆS = S

=P

E
Z
|fn(xS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx) →0

P

ˆS = S

(61)
Observe that
ˆβ
 ≤|θ|1 ≤Kn
According to [33], when we perform a neural network estimation on the true subset of
variables, we have that the total error is bounded by the approximation error, which is
bounded according to [25], plus the estimation error, which is bounded by the covering
number, then by the packing number, then by the Vapnik-Chervonenkis dimension, and
ﬁnally by the space dimension, i.e.
E
Z
|fn(xS) −f(xS)|2µ(dx)
=O
 
L
r
kn
n −1
!
+ δn
(62)
where L is the Lipshitz continuity coeﬃcient, kn is the ﬁrst hidden layer size, and by [33] δn
satisﬁes
P {sup δn > ǫ} ≤8
384K2
n(kn + 1)
ǫ
(2s+5)kn+1
e−nǫ2/128·24K4
n
Under theorem assumptions, the probability above is summable, thus we have the ﬁrst
probability in 61 converges to 1. On the other hand, by theorem 4.2, we have the second
probability in 61 converges to 1. Therefore, the result for regression set up is proved.
49
In the classiﬁcation set up, similarly, we have
P

R(fn, ˆS) −R(f ∗
S) →0

=P

R(fn, ˆS) −R(f ∗
S) →0
 ˆS = S

P

ˆS = S

+ P

R(fn, ˆS) −R(f ∗
S) →0
 ˆS ̸= S

P

ˆS ̸= S

≥P

R(fn, ˆS) −R(f ∗
S) →0
 ˆS = S

P

ˆS = S

=P (R(fn,S) −R(f ∗
S) →0) P

ˆS = S

(63)
By [21], we have
R(fn) −R(f ∗) →0
as n →∞
and from theorem 4.2, we have the second probability in equation 63 tends to 1. Combine
these two results, the consistency of classiﬁcation case is proved.
□
50
