Geo-Aware Networks for Fine-Grained Recognition
Grace Chu
Brian Potetz
Weijun Wang
Andrew Howard
Yang Song
Fernando Brucher
Thomas Leung
Hartwig Adam
Google Research
{cxy, potetz, weijunw, howarda, yangsong, fbrucher, leungt, hadam}@google.com
Abstract
Fine-grained recognition distinguishes among cate-
gories with subtle visual differences. In order to differen-
tiate between these challenging visual categories, it is help-
ful to leverage additional information.
Geolocation is a
rich source of additional information that can be used to
improve ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation accuracy, but has been
understudied. Our contributions to this ﬁeld are twofold.
First, to the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst pa-
per which systematically examined various ways of in-
corporating geolocation information into ﬁne-grained im-
age classiﬁcation through the use of geolocation priors,
post-processing or feature modulation. Secondly, to over-
come the situation where no ﬁne-grained dataset has com-
plete geolocation information, we release1 two ﬁne-grained
datasets with geolocation by providing complementary in-
formation to existing popular datasets - iNaturalist and
YFCC100M. By leveraging geolocation information we im-
prove top-1 accuracy in iNaturalist from 70.1% to 79.0%
for a strong baseline image-only model. Comparing sev-
eral models, we found that best performance was achieved
by a post-processing model that consumed the output of the
image-only baseline alongside geolocation. However, for
a resource-constrained model (MobileNetV2), performance
was better with a feature modulation model that trains
jointly over pixels and geolocation: accuracy increased
from 59.6% to 72.2%. Our work makes a strong case for in-
corporating geolocation information in ﬁne-grained recog-
nition models for both server and on-device.
1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition helps people distinguish subor-
dinate categories of an object, e.g. recognizing the species
of cats, dogs, ﬂowers, etc. [7]. It is a challenging problem as
the visual difference among ﬁne-grained categories is sub-
tle [9]. Moreover, images are often photographed at an-
gles that fail to capture the subtle difference. To overcome
1https://github.com/visipedia/fg geo
Figure 1: Western gray squirrel and its habitat heatmap.
these difﬁculties, researchers have been using various forms
of complementary information besides image pixels to help
with ﬁne-grained recognition, such as attributes, poses, and
text [25, 5, 17].
Geolocation has already been proven to be useful to dis-
tinguish coarse-grained classes, such as bridges and mon-
uments [20, 4]. But the beneﬁts of purely using raw lat-
itude and longitude (lat/lon) was small, while the bulk of
the improvements came from integrating extra features, like
Instagram hashtags associated with different geographical
regions [20].
For ﬁne-grained recognition, on the other
hand, geolocation may play a much bigger role because
the geolocation distribution of a ﬁne-grained object, like
western gray squirrel in Figure 1, is generally more con-
centrated than that of a coarse-grained object, like dog.
Thus, geolocation may be more effective to disambiguate
species than general objects. Also, visually distinguishing
ﬁne-grained classes is generally harder than coarse-grained
classes, which gives more room to improve via other or-
thogonal signals like geolocation.
In this paper, we systematically examine the effective-
ness of using geolocation on ﬁne-grained recognition prob-
lems and show that by only using raw lat/lon, we can
achieve signiﬁcant improvements upon state of the art
image-only models [7].
The improvement of using raw
lat/lon on ﬁne-grained dataset iNaturalist [23] (8.9%) is
even bigger than that using 6 lat/lon derived extra features
on coarse-grained dataset YFCC100M-GEO [20] (7%).
arXiv:1906.01737v2  [cs.CV]  4 Sep 2019
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst examined an intuitive way of using
geolocation priors where we discussed both the Bayesian
approach and a whitelist-based method. Then, we exam-
ined a post-processing method where a geolocation network
is combined with a pre-trained and frozen image network at
the logits layer. Signiﬁcant improvement has been observed
using this model. Finally, we examine geolocation’s impact
on image feature learning through a feature modulation ap-
proach, which signiﬁcantly outperforms other methods for
the case of mobile resource constrained models.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of our geo-
aware models, we introduce two ﬁne-grained datasets
with geolocation information. Both are based on existing
datasets, but with additional ﬁne-grained labels or added ge-
olocation information.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
2 gives an overview of related works. Section 3 presents
the three geo-aware networks we examine in this paper. In
Section 4, two ﬁne-grained datasets with geolocation are
introduced. Then, experimental results are demonstrated in
Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Related Works
Fine-grained recognition differs from general visual
recognition mainly due to the following two aspects: dif-
ferent ﬁne-grained categories usually have little visual dif-
ference that only domain experts can tell; rare subordinate
objects are observed less while commonly seen ones domi-
nant the ﬁne-grained dataset. This leads to a long-tail label
frequency distribution in such problems [13]. Therefore,
although the advances of general convolutional neural net-
works (CNN) [19, 18] can lead to progress in ﬁne-grained
recognition, there is still more research needed in this area.
To deal with the subtle visual difference of ﬁne-
grained recognition, researchers have tried various direc-
tions. Among different model architectures, bilinear CNN
has been proven to be effective through learning localized
feature interactions [8]. Attention networks have also been
used to locate the subtle difference between ﬁne-grained
labels [28, 10].
Besides visual information, researchers
have been using additional information such as pose [5],
attributes [25] and text description [17]. Data augmentation
and transfer learning have also been studied [14, 7].
Geolocation has been widely used for coarse-grained
classiﬁcations. Tang et al. [20] used 6 geolocation related
features and concatenated them with the image model out-
put before the softmax to improve classiﬁcation accuracy on
classes like snow, monument and wave. One of the 6 geolo-
cation related features in this work is latitude and longitude,
while other features incorporated extra information, such
as geographic maps and hashtags in Instagram. To solve
similar problems, Liao et al. [15] approached it by ﬁnding
neighbor images taken near the target image, and then used
the tag distribution of neighbor images as a feature to feed
into support vector machine (SVM) classiﬁers. Geolocation
has also been used for scene understanding [27] and place
identiﬁcation [26].
There are, however, only few works in ﬁne-grained
recognition that have tried using geolocation to improve ac-
curacy. Berg et al. in [4] made a simulated geolocation
ﬁne-grained dataset by combining an image-only dataset
and a geo only dataset.
Then, Bayesian based geoloca-
tion priors were used to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy.
Some participants of PlantCLEF2016 competition [12] tried
using geolocation information. The competition contains
plant species in and around France where only a minority
of the images contain geolocation. A few non-neural net-
work based methods were tried, but with no obvious im-
provements [6, 22].
3. Geo-Aware Networks
In this section, we study three methods to integrate ge-
olocation with image feature based ﬁne-grained models.
3.1. Geolocation Priors
As discussed in the introduction, animal or plant species
are distributed on the earth with some geographical traits.
Assuming the data samples containing geographical infor-
mation are observed independently in both the training and
test datasets, we can extract the geolocation based distribu-
tion from the training data. There are two intuitive ways of
utilizing this distribution without additional model training
or any change to the image-only classiﬁer.
Bayesian Priors: From the Bayesian inference point of
view, given image observation I without additional infor-
mation, traditional ﬁne-grained recognition can be viewed
as a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE).
ˆLMLE(I) = arg max
L
f(I|L),
(1)
where L denotes the image label and f(I|L) denotes the
likelihood function of an observation given the label .
Now assume that a prior distribution P(L|G) over the
ﬁne-grained labels exists and follows some geographical
traits, where G denotes the geolocation of the examined im-
age. Then, it allows us to make a Maximum A Posteriori
(MAP) estimation:
ˆLMAP (I, G) = arg max
L
f(I|L)P(L|G).
(2)
Label Whitelisting: A different way of utilizing the ge-
ographical information is to restrict the inference result by
a geo-restricted whitelist. For example, if an image is taken
in a certain city or a zoo, then only labels that have been ob-
served in that city or zoo will be presented to the user. The
geo-restricted whitelist works as a gating function which re-
stricts output labels to be one in the whitelist of labels that
have data observations within a geo-restricted radius θ:
ˆLMAP (I, G) = arg max
L
f(I|L)1θ(L, G),
(3)
where 1θ(L, G) is an indicator function, which equals to
one when L has observsations within geo-restricted radius
θ of G, zero otherwise.
3.2. Post-Processing Models
We consider a post-processing model to be any model
that does not touch pixels, but instead consumes one or
more image classiﬁers or embeddings. Here, we trained a
post-processing model that consumes the output of the base-
line image classiﬁer together with geolocation coordinates.
The model evaluated below accepts geolocation in its
simplest form: a vector of length two containing latitude
and longitude, normalized to range [−1, 1). We also experi-
mented with Earth-center-ﬁxed rectangular coordinates and
multi-scale one-hot S2 representations [24]. These made
little difference in performance.
Geolocation is then processed by three fully connected
layers of sizes 256, 128, and 128, followed by a layer of log-
its with size equal to the output label map. These are then
added to the logits of the image classiﬁer, or σ−1(output),
where σ(x) = 1/(1 + e−x). Figure 2 shows the diagram
of the architecture. In this late-fusion architecture, no units
jointly encode appearance and location. We also experi-
mented with models where the output of the image classi-
ﬁer or an image embedding was concatenated with one of
the fully-connected layers in the geolocation network. In
these models, units jointly encode appearance and location.
However, adding these visual inputs does not affect perfor-
mance of the post-processing model. This may suggest that
appearance and location are not tightly interdependent.
During training, the weights of the baseline image clas-
siﬁer are ﬁxed, and gradients are not pushed back through
the image classiﬁer. One disadvantage of this is that the
image classiﬁer may waste effort attempting to distinguish
two visually-similar labels that could have been easily dis-
tinguished by geolocation alone.
Post-processing models offer some practical advantages
over jointly training over pixels and geolocation. Learn-
ing rates, hyperparameters, and loss functions are decou-
pled between the two models, and can be tuned separately.
Similarly, the selection and balancing of training data can
be performed independently for image models versus ge-
olocation models. If labeled training images without ge-
olocation are available, they can be used to train the im-
age classiﬁer but omitted when training the post-processing
model. If label noise is correlated with appearance but not
with location (e.g. mustang cars mixed in with horses), then
the post-processing model may beneﬁt from the inclusion of
noisier training data sources that harm image classiﬁer per-
formance.
Figure 2:
Network architecture for post-processing models.
Logistic−1 is the inverse function of logistic function. “FCL” de-
notes fully connected layer. The last FCL outside geo net box is
the logits layer.
Another feature of the post-processing model is that the
geolocation network only needs to learn the residual be-
tween the baseline image classiﬁer output and the ground-
truth. If the baseline image classiﬁer already classiﬁes a la-
bel perfectly, then no geolocation model will be learned for
that label, since none is needed. Thus, the post-processing
model minimizes its reliance on geolocation cues: it relies
on geolocation only in proportion to how much it improves
an image classiﬁer that was previously trained to maximize
performance.
Adding the logits of the geolocation and image networks
has some theoretical basis. Suppose appearance and loca-
tion were conditionally independent of each other given the
ground-truth label (so that the appearance of a label does
not change depending on its location). Then P(L, G|I) =
P(L|I)P(G|L), where I is the image, G is the geolocation,
and L is the ground-truth label. For convenience, deﬁne the
likelihood ratio R = P(G|L)/P(G|¯L), where ¯L denotes
the condition that label L is false. Then:
P(L|I, G) =
P(L, G|I)
P(L, G|I) + P(¯L, G|I)
=
P(L|I)P(G|L)
P(L|I)P(G|L) + P(¯L|I)P(G|¯L)
=
P(L|I)R
P(L|I)(R −1) + 1
=

1 +
1
RP(L|I) −1
R
−1
= σ

−log

1
RP(L|I) −1
R

= σ

−log

1
P(L|I) −1

+ log(R)

= σ
 σ−1(P(L|I)) + log(R)

.
Thus, if conditional independence holds, then the post-
processing network would be optimal in the sense that it
outputs the exact posterior probability P(L|I, G) if the out-
put of image classiﬁer equals P(L|I) and the geolocation
logits activation equals log(R). Conditional independence
is a sufﬁcient condition for the model to behave optimally
for some set of weights, but not a necessary condition.
Figure 3: Network architecture of using geolocation to affect im-
age features. FCL* represents FCL without activation, and has
a reshape operation afterwards to match the feature dimension it
adds to.
For example, suppose geolocation could sometimes be esti-
mated from the background of the image. In this scenario,
models using Bayesian priors would double-count location
evidence, adjusting scores based on location even though
the image classiﬁer already factored it in. In contrast, since
the post-processing model trains the geolocation network
based on the residual between the baseline image classiﬁer
output and the ground-truth, no double-counting occurs; the
learned geolocation model is only as strong as geolocation
evidence not already captured by the baseline image classi-
ﬁer.
3.3. Feature Modulation Models
To examine whether geolocation can have a deeper effect
on image feature learning, we built networks with geoloca-
tion information integrated into the image features.
Similar to post-processing model, we use addition to
modulate image features via geolocation features.
As
shown in Figure 3, latitude and longitude ﬁrst go through a
set of fully connected layers. Then, depending on the shape
of each image feature, the output of geolocation network
goes through different sized fully connected layers (with-
out activation) to be reshaped before adding to the image
feature. Mathematically,
F ∗
post−act = Fpost−act + β,
(4)
where F and F ∗are image features before and after mod-
ulation. Subscript “post-act” indicates that the features are
modulated after activation. β are reshaped geolocation fea-
tures.
Not all image features from each layer are modulated by
geolocation features. Lowest level image features are gen-
eral features specifying lines or edges of the object, which
conveys little information about species level distinction.
Thus, we only modulate middle and higher image features
instead of lower ones. We also experimented with models
that modulated all image features, but didn’t get better re-
sults.
Perez et al. [16] introduced a generic feature modulation
called FiLM. Speciﬁcally, they modulated image features
by both multiplication and addition as follows:
F ∗
pre−act = γ ∗Fpre−act + β,
(5)
where subscript “pre-act” indicates that the features are
modulated before activation. γ and β are modulation fea-
tures. In Section 5.3, we will show that, for geo-aware net-
works, only using addition is the best way to modulate im-
age features.
4. Fine-Grained Datasets with Geolocation
One challenge of using geolocation in ﬁne-grained
recognition is the lack of ﬁne-grained datasets with geolo-
cation information. To the best of our knowledge, there
are only two ﬁne-grained datasets that have been used in
geolocation related research in this ﬁeld [4, 12]. In [4],
the authors simulated a geolocation ﬁne-grained dataset
by matching images from an image-only dataset with ran-
dom observations from a geolocation only dataset with the
same ground-truth label. The dataset for one of the Image-
CLEF/LifeCLEF competitions [2], PlantCLEF2016 [12],
contains partial geolocation information (less than half of
the data) and is restricted to only plants from France.
In this section, we will introduce two ﬁne-grained
datasets with geolocation, one for both training and eval-
uation; the other for evaluation only. Both datasets contain
genuine (not simulated) and worldwide geolocation.
4.1. iNaturalist Dataset with Geolocation
We introduce the iNaturalist ﬁne-grained dataset with
geolocation based on the data from iNaturalist challenge at
FGVC (ﬁne-grained visual categorization) 2017. The chal-
lenge data, without geolocation, was published in [23] and
available in the challenge page [3]. The state-of-the-art clas-
siﬁcation results based on this dataset were presented in [7].
This dataset contains 5089 ﬁne-grained labels. To be com-
parable with existing results, we used the same train/test
split as in [7], where 665,473 images are in training and
9,697 images are in test.
To obtain geolocation information of above dataset, we
ﬁrst map image keys in [3] to observation ids. Then, we
utilize the iNaturalist observation data from Global Biodi-
versity Information Facility (GBIF) [11] which contains ob-
servation ids and geolocation data. From the path of image
keys to observation ids to geolocation, we can ﬁnd the cor-
responding geolocation information for existing iNaturalist
challenge images.
During the mapping process, there are ∼4% images that
couldn’t ﬁnd corresponding geolocation information, due to
either missing observation ids in [3] or missing geolocation
in the GBIF observation data. The ﬁnal geolocated dataset
contains 645,424 images in training and 9,394 images in
test. Figure 4(a) shows the heatmap of the geolocation dis-
tribution of the obtained dataset, including both training and
test data. This indicates the worldwide distribution of our
iNaturalist based ﬁne-grained geolocation dataset.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: Geolocation distribution of (a) iNaturalist dataset, and
(b) YFCC100M ﬁne-grained evaluation dataset.
4.2. YFCC100M Fine-Grained Evaluation Dataset
with Geolocation
The YFCC100M dataset consists of 100 million Flickr
images and videos with creative commons licences [21].
For each image, we identiﬁed Flickr tags or image titles
that contained labels corresponding to one of the 5089 ﬁne-
grained plant and animal species labels from the iNatu-
ralist dataset in Section 4.1. Since iNaturalist labels are
all species-level, images with multiple labels were omit-
ted. 1,362,447 geolocated images had a single matching
label.
iNaturalist labels in the YFCC100M dataset are
highly skewed towards popular species like domestic ani-
mals, cut ﬂowers, and zoo animals. To mitigate the impact
of highly common labels, we limited our evaluation to at
most 10 examples per label. Of 4721 labels represented in
YFCC100M, 3553 labels had at least 10 examples. 36,146
labeled geolocated images were used in total. The distribu-
tion heatmap of geolocations of these images are shown in
Figure 4(b), which has similar coverage as iNaturalist ge-
olocation dataset.
5. Experimental Results
In this section, we present experimental results of the
examined geo-aware networks.
To show the effective-
ness of using geolocation, we compare geo-aware networks
with the state-of-the-art image-only model presented in [7].
Speciﬁcally, we take the Inception V3 with 299x299 in-
put size as the image baseline classiﬁer. From this initial
checkpoint, we train or calculate results for our geo-aware
networks based on the iNaturalist dataset with geolocation.
We evaluate each model over the independent YFCC100M
dataset to show the generalization of the geo-aware net-
works. Finally, we show how performance is affected in
a mobile on-device setting, using a MobileNetV2 baseline.
5.1. Geolocation Priors
As discussed in Section 3.1, we assume that the geoloca-
tion priors follow certain geographical traits, therefore the
prior distribution will differ as geolocation changes. To use
the geolocation based prior distribution for inference, we
treat the geolocation of each testing data sample as a refer-
ence point. For each reference point, all training data points
within a certain radius from this referenced geolocation are
counted with equal weights and a histogram of class labels
is calculated. After this, we either use the histogram as a
whitelist of labels or normalize it to get a prior probability
distribution.
We empirically pick the best radius for the best base-
line accuracy numbers using geolocation priors. We picked
a few radius in the range sweeping from 50 miles to 5000
miles and found 100 miles to be the golden number for iNat-
uralist dataset. We also found that using geolocation based
Bayesian prior produces worse results on iNaturalist, which
is likely due to fact that the geolocation based prior distri-
butions in the test set are more uniform and mismatch the
ones estimated from the training set. Using a label whitelist
mitigates the disparity between the prior distribution on the
training set and the one on the test set, which gives better
results. More quantitative results are given in Table 1.
Table 1: Top-1 accuracies using geolocation based Bayesian priors
and whitelist with different radius (miles) at each test location on
iNaturalist dataset; the image-only baseline model gives 70.1% [7]
50
100
500
1000
Bayesian Priors
68.5%
69.4%
67.8%
66.5%
Whitelisting
71.3%
72.6%
72.3%
71.8%
5.2. Post-Processing Models
The post-processing models were trained over the iNat-
uralist training partition at a learning rate of 0.02 without
decay. It consumed the output of the Inception V3 model
described in Section 5, without touching pixels. Evaluated
over the iNaturalist evaluation set, it achieved 79.0% accu-
racy for the top label, an increase of 8.9% over the baseline
model.
5.3. Feature Modulation Models
Experimental setups for feature modulation model are as
follows. Take Figure 3 as the reference, FCL layers inside
geolocation network have output sizes of 128 then 256. We
use Inception V3 as the image CNN and apply feature mod-
ulations for all image features out of the Inception mod-
ules [19]. The whole network, including image CNN and
geo net, are trained together end to end, where only the im-
age CNN part has parameters initialization copied from the
image-only baseline model. We have used RMSprop op-
timizer with initial learning rate 0.0045, decaying every 4
epochs with decay rate 0.94.
The last bolded line in Table 2 shows the Top-1 and
Top-5 accuracies of the proposed feature modulation model.
Comparing with the image-only model (ﬁrst line), our pro-
posed geo-aware network achieves 8.1% increase on top-1
accuracy and 3.9% increase on top-5 accuracy.
Table 2: Top-k accuracies for different feature modulations. F and
R(F) denote the image feature before and after (ReLU) activa-
tion. R(·) and S(·) denote ReLU and Sigmoid activation function
respectively. γ and β are geolocation features which are the out-
puts of two different geo networks followed by the reshape FCL*
for each modulation layer.
Top-1
Top-5
Feature Modulation
Accuracy
Accuracy
None [7]
70.1%
89.4%
FiLM: R(γ × F + β) [16]
72.5%
90.8%
R(γ) × R(F) + R(β)
65.6%
87.1%
S(γ) × R(F) + R(β)
76.8%
93.1%
S(γ) × R(F)
76.2%
92.9%
R(F) + R(β)
77.2%
93.1%
R(F ) + β
78.2%
93.3%
The second line in Table 2 shows results of using the
general feature modulation scheme proposed in [16]. The
improvements over image-only model, 2.4%, is less than
one third of that obtained by our customized feature mod-
ulation model. In addition, we also tried other variations
of the feature modulation, including modulating the feature
before/after activation, using multiplication and/or addition
as the modulation operation, and different activation func-
tions on the modulator before combining with image fea-
tures. We have listed some results in Table 2. However,
none of them gives better results than our proposed method.
Results demonstrate that addition is the preferred way to
affect image features when using geolocation as the modu-
lator.
5.4. Comparison of Different Geo-Aware Networks
We summarize the best result from each network in Ta-
ble 3.
While all geo-aware networks achieve better re-
sults than image-only models, post-processing and fea-
ture modulation models give much better results than us-
ing geolocation priors. Among all models, post-processing
model performs the best.
The higher performance by
post-processing model is informative because while fea-
ture modulation networks can capture arbitrary relation-
ships f(appearance, location), post-processing models
are severely restricted in the relationships between ap-
pearance and location they can capture, expressing only
softmax(g(appearance) + h(location)). This suggests
that the dependencies between appearance and location that
cannot be expressed by post-processing models may be rare
in nature for ﬁne-grained plants & animals.
As ﬁne-grained dataset usually has long tail distribution
[13], we also show the results on head and tail images in Ta-
ble 3. All geo-aware networks improve more on tail images
than on head images. Speciﬁcally, the best post-processing
Table 3: Top-1 accuracies of different geo-aware networks, to-
gether with the head and tail results. Head and tail images are
images whose labels have ≥100 images and < 100 images in
training set, respectively.
Geo-aware
Top-1
Head:
Tail:
Model
Accu
≥100 im
<100 im
Image-Only
70.1% [7]
76.5%
66.2%
Whitelisting
72.6%
77.2%
68.6%
Post-Process
79.0%
81.0%
77.2%
Feature Modulate
78.2%
81.1%
75.6%
model gives a 4.5% increase on head images while having
a 11% increase on tail images, 2.4 times more improvement
than on the head images. This implies that geolocation ben-
eﬁts more on lower baseline models which have more room
to improve.
To better understand how geolocation improves the clas-
siﬁcation, we show some example images in Figure 5 where
geo-aware networks correct the wrong label given by the
image-only model. Columns in this ﬁgure are, from left
to right: image and its ground-truth label; geolocation of
where this image was taken; top-1 label given by the image-
only model, geo distribution heatmap of this label and a
sample image of the same label randomly chosen from
training dataset; top-1 label given by post-processing and
feature modulation models (these two models give the same
result for these examples), its corresponding geo distribu-
tion heatmap and a sample training image.
Take the ﬁrst row as an example where the image-only
model gives the wrong label - red-bellied woodpecker,
while geo-aware models give the correct label - nuttall’s
woodpecker. By just looking at the sample images of these
two labels/species, it is hard to visually distinguish them.
However, they have completely different geolocation dis-
tributions which indicates their different habitats. Speciﬁ-
cally, nuttall’s woodpecker is only located on the west coast
of America, while red-bellied woodpecker is mainly loacted
in the center and the east coast of America. Therefore, when
geo-aware models see that the image was taken on the west
coast, they know that the bird in the image cannot be a red-
bellied woodpecker whose habitat is in the center and east
coast, and thus corrects the result.
5.5. Results on Mobile Image Networks
While large models like Inception V3 give the best accu-
racy, their size and inference latency limits them to only
running on server machines.
However, there are cases
where we need to run models on device due to connectivity,
privacy, or speed concerns. In this subsection, we exam-
ine the performance of our geo-aware networks on a small
on-device model: MobileNetV2.
We used the same settings as the ones used for Incep-
tion V3 in [7] to train the MobileNetV2 image-only model
Figure 5: Examples where geo-aware networks corrected the prediction results using geolocation information. Distribution heatmaps are
obtained by searching for the particular species/taxonomy in iNaturalist org [1].
on the iNaturalist dataset. Then, three geo-aware networks
are calculated or trained based on this baseline image only
classiﬁer. For the feature modulation model, feature modu-
lations are applied for all blocks with inverted bottlenecks.
Table 4 shows the results on MobileNetV2 comparing to
those on Inception V3.
Table 4: Top-1 Accuracies of different geo-aware networks ap-
plied on different image baseline classiﬁers.
Geo-aware Model
Inception V3
MobileNetV2
Image-Only
70.1% [7]
59.6%
Whitelisting
72.6%
62.1%
Post-Process
79.0%
70.7%
Feature Mod.
78.2%
72.2%
Since the accuracy of the baseline is smaller, it has more
room to improve.
The best geo-aware network achieves
12.6% top-1 accuracy increase over the image-only model,
comparing with the 8.1% increase for the larger model. Im-
portantly, the best geo-aware network based on the Mo-
bileNetV2 model achieves even better performance than the
image-only network based on Inception V3.
Unlike the results on Inception V3, feature modula-
tion models outperform post-processing models on Mo-
bileNetV2 image baseline model. Recall that one disadvan-
tage of the post-processing models is that the baseline im-
age classiﬁer it relies on must expend effort to distinguish
Table 5: Top-1 accuracy of geo-aware networks, upon Inception
V3 image baseline network, when evaluating on different evalua-
tion data. FG denotes ﬁne-grained.
Image
Post-
Feature
Evaluation Dataset
Only
Process
Mod.
iNaturalist Eval
70.1%
79.0%
78.2%
YFCC100M FG Eval
54.6%
60.5%
58.7%
visually-similar labels that can be easily disambiguated us-
ing geolocation. For a larger Inception model, this may be a
small penalty. However, wasting capacity to visually distin-
guish, for example, American and European Magpies may
be especially costly for a smaller on-device model.
5.6. Results on YFCC100M Evaluation Data
To demonstrate the generalization of the results in Sec-
tion 5.4, the same models were also evaluated over our
newly introduced YFCC100M ﬁne-grained dataset.
Re-
sults are shown in Table 5. Post-processing model achieves
5.9% gain over image-only model, while feature modu-
lation model achieves 4.1% gain. The improvements are
smaller than those on iNaturalist evaluation set because the
quality of this dataset is not as good as iNaturalist, which
have been veriﬁed by domain experts. For example, some
images in YFCC100M dataset contain animal sculptures in-
stead of real animals, or the animal is mentioned in descrip-
tion and thus in the label but does not appear in the image.
6. Conclusion
We have given a systematic overview of geo-aware net-
works for ﬁne-grained recognition. To deal with the lack of
ﬁne-grained geolocation datasets, we introduced the iNat-
uralist and YFCC100M ﬁne-grained geolocation datasets.
Experimental results show that all geo-aware networks
achieve signiﬁcant improvements over image-only models.
Speciﬁcally, the post-processing model performs best on
large baseline models, while the feature modulation model
performs best on small baseline models and even outper-
forms the large image-only model. Although experiments
in this paper are mainly on animal and plant species recog-
nition, we believe that the geo-aware networks examined
in this paper are generally useful and can be easily ex-
tended for recognizing any location sensitive ﬁne-grained
categories, such as car’s make/model and food.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Yanan Qian,
Fred Fung, Christine Kaeser-Chen, Professor Serge Be-
longie, Chenyang Zhang, Grant Van Horn and Oisin Mac
Aodha for their help and useful discussions.
References
[1] A
Community
for
Naturalists
-
iNaturalist.org.
https://www.inaturalist.org. 7
[2] ImageCLEF / LifeCLEF - Multimedia Retrieval in CLEF.
https://www.imageclef.org/. 4
[3] iNaturalist
Challenge
at
FGVC
2017.
https://www.kaggle.com/c/inaturalist-challenge-at-fgvc-
2017. 4
[4] T. Berg, J. Liu, S. W. Lee, M. L. Alexander, D. W. Jacobs,
and P. N. Belhumeur.
Birdsnap: Large-scale ﬁne-grained
visual categorization of birds. In CVPR, June 2014. 1, 2, 4
[5] S. Branson, G. V. Horn, S. J. Belongie, and P. Perona. Bird
species categorization using pose normalized deep convolu-
tional nets. CoRR, abs/1406.2952, 2014. 1, 2
[6] J. Champ, H. Go¨eau, and A. Joly. Floristic participation at
LifeCLEF 2016 Plant Identiﬁcation Task. In CLEF, pages
450–458, ´Evora, Portugal, Sept. 2016. 2
[7] Y. Cui, Y. Song, C. Sun, A. Howard, and S. Belongie. Large
scale ﬁne-grained categorization and domain-speciﬁc trans-
fer learning. In CVPR, 2018. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7
[8] Y. Cui, F. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Lin, and S. Belongie.
Kernel pooling for convolutional neural networks. In CVPR,
July 2017. 2
[9] J. Deng, J. Krause, and L. Fei-Fei. Fine-grained crowdsourc-
ing for ﬁne-grained recognition. In CVPR, June 2013. 1
[10] J. Fu, H. Zheng, and T. Mei. Look closer to see better: Recur-
rent attention convolutional neural network for ﬁne-grained
image recognition. In CVPR, July 2017. 2
[11] GBIF.org (2019).
iNaturalist research-grade observations.
https://doi.org/10.15468/ab3s5x. 4
[12] H. Go¨eau, P. Bonnet, and A. Joly. Plant Identiﬁcation in an
Open-world (LifeCLEF 2016). In CLEF, pages 428–439,
´Evora, Portugal, Sept. 2016. 2, 4
[13] G. V. Horn and P. Perona. The devil is in the tails: Fine-
grained classiﬁcation in the wild. CoRR, abs/1709.01450,
2017. 2, 6
[14] J. Krause, B. Sapp, A. Howard, H. Zhou, A. Toshev,
T. Duerig, J. Philbin, and L. Fei-Fei. The unreasonable effec-
tiveness of noisy data for ﬁne-grained recognition. In ECCV,
pages 301–320, 2016. 2
[15] S. Liao, X. Li, H. T. Shen, Y. Yang, and X. Du. Tag features
for geo-aware image classiﬁcation. IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia, 17(7):1058–1067, July 2015. 2
[16] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. de Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. C.
Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general condition-
ing layer. CoRR, abs/1709.07871, 2017. 4, 6
[17] S. Reed, Z. Akata, H. Lee, and B. Schiele. Learning deep
representations of ﬁne-grained visual descriptions. In CVPR,
June 2016. 1, 2
[18] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C.
Chen.
Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottle-
necks. In CVPR, June 2018. 2
[19] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna.
Rethinking the inception architecture for computer vision. In
CVPR, June 2016. 2, 5
[20] K. Tang, M. Paluri, L. Fei-Fei, R. Fergus, and L. Bourdev.
Improving image classiﬁcation with location context.
In
ICCV, December 2015. 1, 2
[21] B. Thomee, D. A. Shamma, G. Friedland, B. Elizalde, K. Ni,
D. Poland, D. Borth, and L.-J. Li. YFCC100M: The new
data in multimedia research. Commun. ACM, 59(2):64–73,
Jan. 2016. 5
[22] B. T´oth, M. J. T´oth, D. Papp, and G. Sz¨ucs. Deep learning
and svm classiﬁcation for plant recognition in content-based
large scale image retrieval. In CLEF, 2016. 2
[23] G. Van Horn, O. Mac Aodha, Y. Song, Y. Cui, C. Sun,
A. Shepard, H. Adam, P. Perona, and S. Belongie. The inat-
uralist species classiﬁcation and detection dataset. In CVPR,
2018. 1, 4
[24] E. Veach, J. Rosenstock, E. Engle, R. Snedegar, J. Basch,
and T. Manshreck. S2 geometry. http://s2geometry.io/. 3
[25] A. Vedaldi, S. Mahendran, S. Tsogkas, S. Maji, R. Girshick,
J. Kannala, E. Rahtu, I. Kokkinos, M. B. Blaschko, D. Weiss,
B. Taskar, K. Simonyan, N. Saphra, and S. Mohamed. Un-
derstanding objects in detail with ﬁne-grained attributes. In
CVPR, June 2014. 1, 2
[26] B. Yan, K. Janowicz, G. Mai, and R. Zhu. xnet+sc: Classify-
ing places based on images by incorporating spatial contexts.
In GIScience, 2018. 2
[27] J. Yu and J. Luo. Leveraging probabilistic season and loca-
tion context models for scene understanding. In CIVR, pages
169–178, 2008. 2
[28] H. Zheng, J. Fu, T. Mei, and J. Luo. Learning multi-attention
convolutional neural network for ﬁne-grained image recog-
nition. In ICCV, Oct 2017. 2
