A geometric multigrid library for quadtree/octree AMR
grids coupled to MPI-AMRVAC
J. Teunissena,b,∗, R. Keppensa
aCentre for mathematical Plasma Astrophysics, Department of Mathematics, KU
Leuven, Celestijnenlaan 200B, 3001 Leuven, Belgium
bCentrum Wiskunde & Informatica, PO Box 94079, 1090 GB Amsterdam, The
Netherlands
Abstract
We present an eﬃcient MPI-parallel geometric multigrid library for quadtree
(2D) or octree (3D) grids with adaptive reﬁnement. Cartesian 2D/3D and
cylindrical 2D geometries are supported, with second-order discretizations
for the elliptic operators. Periodic, Dirichlet, and Neumann boundary con-
ditions can be handled, as well as free-space boundary conditions for 3D
Poisson problems, for which we use an FFT-based solver on the coarse grid.
Scaling results up to 1792 cores are presented. The library can be used to
extend adaptive mesh reﬁnement frameworks with an elliptic solver, which
we demonstrate by coupling it to MPI-AMRVAC. Several test cases are pre-
sented in which the multigrid routines are used to control the divergence of
the magnetic ﬁeld in magnetohydrodynamic simulations.
Keywords:
multigrid; elliptic solver; octree; adaptive mesh reﬁnement;
divergence cleaning
1. Introduction
A typical example of an elliptic partial diﬀerential equation (PDE) is
Poisson’s equation
∇· (ε∇φ) = f,
(1)
where the right-hand side f and coeﬃcient ε are given and φ has to be
obtained given certain boundary conditions. Equations like (1) appear in
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail address: jannis@teunissen.net
Preprint submitted to Computer Physics Communications
April 6, 2022
arXiv:1901.11370v2  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Jul 2019
many applications, for example when computing electrostatic or gravitational
potentials, or when simulating incompressible ﬂows. An important property
of elliptic equations is that they are non-local: their solution at one location
depends on the solution and right-hand side elsewhere. Here we present a
library for the parallel solution of elliptic PDEs on quadtree and octree grids
with adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR).
Elliptic PDEs can be solved with e.g., fast Fourier transforms (FFTs),
cyclic reduction methods, direct sparse solvers, preconditioned iterative meth-
ods, multipole methods and multigrid methods, see e.g. [1]. These methods
diﬀer in their ﬂexibility, for example in terms of supported mesh types and
boundary conditions, and in whether the coeﬃcient ε in equation (1) is al-
lowed to have a smooth or discontinuous spatial variation. They also diﬀer in
their eﬃciency. The fastest multigrid methods operate in time O(N), where
N denotes the number of unknowns. FFT-based methods (with or without
cyclic reduction) typically require time O(N log N). Most other methods are
more expensive, although their cost is often problem-dependent. Due to the
non-local nature of elliptic equations, there are also signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
how well solvers can be parallelized. A comparison of the performance and
scaling of several state-of-the-art Poisson solvers can be found in [1].
Our motivation was to extend MPI-AMRVAC [2, 3] with an elliptic solver.
MPI-AMRVAC is a parallel AMR framework for (magneto)hydrodynamics sim-
ulations that it is typically used to study solar and astrophysical phenomena.
The framework has a focus on solving conservation laws with shock-capturing
methods and quadtree/octree AMR. Such AMR grids are ideally suited to
geometric multigrid methods, which iteratively solve elliptic equations by
employing a hierarchy of grids. Geometric multigrid methods can also be
highly eﬃcient, with an ideal O(N) time complexity, and they are matrix-
free, which means that no matrix has to be stored or pre-computed.
There are already a number of AMR frameworks that include a multi-
grid solver. Examples are Boxlib [4] (superseded by AMReX), Maestro [5],
Gerris [6], RAMSES [7], NIRVANA [8] and Paramesh/FLASH [9, 10]. However,
the included multigrid solvers are typically coupled to (and optimized for)
the application codes, so that they cannot easily be used in other projects.
In recent years, several highly scalable multigrid solvers have been devel-
oped. A combination of geometric and algebraic multigrid was used in [11]
to obtain a matrix-free method that could scale to 2.6 × 105 cores.
Rel-
evant is also the development of the open-source HPGMG code [12] (https:
//hpgmg.org/), which is aimed at benchmarking HPC systems with geo-
2
metric multigrid methods. HPGMG has already been coupled to Boxlib, but
as the code’s primary goal appears to be benchmarking it was not clear how
easily it could be coupled to MPI-AMRVAC, which is written in Fortran. An-
other relevant code is DENDRO [13], which can solve PDEs on ﬁnite element
meshes. Dendro was written in C++ and uses the PETSc library [14]. Finally,
we mention Hypre [15], a library of high performance multigrid solvers and
preconditioners.
Because there appeared to be no geometric multigrid library that we could
easily couple to MPI-AMRVAC, we have developed such a library ourselves. The
main features of the library are:
• Support for solving elliptic PDEs on quadtree/octree AMR grids in
Cartesian (2D/3D) and axisymmetric (2D) geometries.
• Support for Dirichlet, Neumann and periodic boundary conditions, as
well as free space boundary conditions in 3D.
• MPI-based parallelization that can scale to 103 or more processors.
• All source code is written in Fortran, under an open source license
(GPLv3).
The source code can be found at https://github.com/
jannisteunissen/octree-mg.
The library is relatively simple and small, with currently less than 4000 lines
of code, but this simplicity also means that there are a number of limitations:
• Only second-order accurate 5/7-point discretizations of elliptic opera-
tors are supported for now.
• Polar and spherical grids are not supported. They are not compatible
with the point-wise smoothers used here, see section 2.2.
• Geometric multigrid is here used as a solver. With libraries such as
PETSc and Hypre multigrid can also be used as a preconditioner.
• Strong scaling is here demonstrated up to about 2 × 103 processors.
For signiﬁcantly larger runs, a more sophisticated parallel implemen-
tation could be required, see section 2.7.
Multigrid methods that
are potentially more suitable for such large problems can be found
in e.g. [1, 12, 15].
3
Contents of the paper: The design and implementation of the library are
described in section 2. Afterwards, several convergence and scaling tests are
presented in section 3.
Finally, we use the library section for divergence
cleaning in MHD simulations with MPI-AMRVAC in section 4.
2. Geometric multigrid library
2.1. Introduction to multigrid
Below, we provide only a brief introduction to multigrid methods. For
a more detailed introduction to multigrid, there exist a number of excellent
textbooks and review papers, see for example [16, 17, 18, 19].
Relaxation methods such as the Gauss-Seidel method and successive over-
relaxation (SOR) can be used to solve elliptic PDEs. However, the conver-
gence rate of such methods decreases for larger problem sizes, which can
be analyzed by decomposing the error into diﬀerent wavelengths. Typically,
only short wavelength errors are eﬀectively damped.
One reason for this
is that the solution is locally updated, so that it can take a large number
of iterations for information to propagate throughout the domain. Because
relaxation methods locally smooth the error, they are also referred to as
smoothers. The multigrid library presented here includes a couple relaxation
methods / smoothers, which are described in section 2.2.
The main idea behind geometric multigrid methods is to accelerate the
convergence of a relaxation method by applying it on a hierarchy of grids.
With the relaxation method, short wavelength errors can eﬀectively be damped
on any grid in the hierarchy. However, a short wavelength on a coarse grid
corresponds to a long wavelength on a ﬁne grid.
By combining informa-
tion from all grid levels, it is possible to eﬃciently damp all of the error
wavelengths. The transfer of information between grid levels is done by pro-
longation (interpolation) and restriction, which are described in section 2.3.
The order in which relaxation, prolongation and restriction are performed is
determined by the multigrid cycle type. We support two popular options,
namely V-cycles and full multigrid (FMG) cycles, see section 2.4.
2.2. Included operators and smoothers
When an elliptic PDE is discretized on a mesh with grid spacing h, it can
be written in the following form
Lhφh = f h,
(2)
4
where L is an elliptic operator, φ is the solution to be obtained, f is the
right-hand side, and the superscript h indicates that these quantities are dis-
cretized. The multigrid library contains several predeﬁned elliptic equations,
namely:
• ∇· (∇φ) = f: Poisson’s equation
• ∇· (ε∇φ) = f: Poisson’s equation with a variable coeﬃcient ε
• ∇· (∇φ) −λφ = f: Helmholtz equation with λ ≥0
• ∇· (ε∇φ) −λφ = f: Helmholtz equation with a variable coeﬃcient ε
These equations are discretized with a standard 5/7-point second-order accu-
rate discretization, in which the solution and the right-hand side are deﬁned
at cell centers. The library supports grids with structured adaptive mesh
reﬁnement, see section 2.5. On such grids, the discretization of Poisson’s
equation in 2D at a cell (i, j) is for example given by
h−2
x (φi−1,j −2φi,j + φi+1,j) + h−2
y (φi,j−1 −2φi,j + φi,j+1) = fi,j,
(3)
where hx and hy denote the grid spacing in the x and y direction, respectively.
The generalization to 3D is straightforward (an extra term for the z-direction
appears). With a variable coeﬃcient, we use the following discretization for
Poisson’s equation in 2D
h−2
x

¯εi−1/2,j(φi−1,j −φi,j) + ¯εi+1/2,j(φi+1,j −φi,j)

(4)
+ h−2
y

¯εi,j−1/2(φi,j−1 −φi,j) + ¯εi,j+1/2(φi,j+1 −φi,j)

= fi,j,
(5)
where ¯ε denotes the harmonic mean of the coeﬃcients in neighboring cells.
For example, the coeﬃcient between cells (i −1, j) and (i, j) is deﬁned as
¯εi−1/2,j = 2 εi,j εi−1,j
εi,j + εi−1,j
.
The variation in the coeﬃcients has to be smooth enough for standard multi-
grid methods to work, since we adopt no special treatment for discontinuous
coeﬃcients (see for example [19]).
Besides the equations listed above, users can also deﬁne their own elliptic
operators. Currently, the library supports discrete operators with 5-point
stencils in 2D and 7-point stencils in 3D. The advantage of employing such
5
sparse stencils (without diagonal elements) is that the amount of commu-
nication between processors is signiﬁcantly reduced. However, the library
could relatively easily be extended to support 9/27-point stencils in 2D/3D
that also use diagonal elements.
When performing multigrid, a smoother (relaxation method) has to be
employed to smooth the error in the solution. We include point-wise smoothers
of the Gauss-Seidel type, which solve the discretized equations for φi,j while
keeping the values at neighbors ﬁxed. For example, for equation (3) the local
solution φ∗
i,j is given by
φ∗
i,j =
1
h−2
x + h−2
y

h−2
x (φi−1,j + φi+1,j) + h−2
y (φi,j−1 + φi,j+1) −fi,j

.
The order in which a smoother replaces the old values φi,j by φ∗
i,j aﬀects the
smoothing behavior. Two orderings are provided:
• Standard Gauss-Seidel, which linearly loops over all the (i, j) indices
(in the order they are stored in the computer’s memory).
• Gauss-Seidel red-black, which ﬁrst updates all points for which i + j is
even, and then all points for which i + j is odd.
A downside of point-wise smoothers is that they require the ‘coupling’
between unknowns to be of similar strength in all directions, otherwise the
convergence rate is reduced (see e.g. [18]). For a Laplace equation ∇2ψ =
0 on a Cartesian grid, this means that hx, hy and hz have to be similar,
e.g. within a factor two. This also restricts the geometries in which a point-
wise smoother can be applied. For example, in 3D cylindrical coordinates
the Laplace equation becomes
1
r∂r(r∂rψ) + 1
r2∂2
φψ + ∂2
zψ = 0.
The 1/r2 factor in front of the ∂2
φ term violates the similar-coupling require-
ment, which is why 3D cylindrical coordinates are not supported in the li-
brary. However, a discretization for a constant-coeﬃcient Poisson equation
in a 2D axisymmetric geometry is provided.
So-called line smoothers or plane smoothers solve for multiple unknowns
along a line or a plane simultaneously. They are typically more robust than
point-wise smoothers, and they can be used to perform multigrid in po-
lar/spherical coordinate systems [20, 21]. However, line or plane smoothers
6
1/4
1/4
1/2
1/2
1/4
1/4
coarse
ghost cell
Figure 1: Illustration of the prolongation procedure in 2D. Cell-centered values on the
coarse and ﬁne grid are indicated by red and black circles, respectively. Arrows and weights
indicate which coarse grid values are used for the interpolation. Near block boundaries,
the interpolation makes use of coarse grid ghost cells, but note that no diagonal ghost cells
are used. Formulas for the interpolation scheme are given in equations (6) and (7).
are incompatible with grid reﬁnement if standard multigrid cycles are used,
because they would have to solve for unknowns at diﬀerent reﬁnement levels.
2.3. Prolongation and restriction
Besides a smoother, multigrid also requires prolongation and restriction
methods, which transfer data from coarse to ﬁne grids and vice versa. For
prolongation we use linear interpolation based on the nearest neighbors, as is
also included in e.g. the Boxlib [4] and Aﬁvo [22] frameworks. The procedure
is illustrated in ﬁgure 1 for a 2D case, and can be described by the following
equations:
fx+h/4,y+h/4 = 1
4 (2fx,y + fx+h,y + fx,y+h) + O(h2),
(6)
fx−h/4,y+h/4 = 1
4 (2fx,y + fx−h,y + fx,y+h) + O(h2),
with the schemes for other points following from symmetry.
In 3D, the
interpolation stencil becomes
fx+h/4,y+h/4,z+h/4 = 1
4 (fx,y,z + fx+h,y,z + fx,y+h,z + fx,y,z+h) + O(h2),
(7)
fx−h/4,y+h/4,z+h/4 = 1
4 (fx,y,z + fx−h,y,z + fx,y+h,z + fx,y,z+h) + O(h2).
7
smoothing
restriction
prolongation
down
up
base
V-cycle
FMG cycle
h
initial
restriction
(no smoothing)
2h
4h
8h
Figure 2: Schematic illustration of the V-cycle and FMG cycle for a grid with four levels.
The FMG cycle contains several V-cycles at increasingly ﬁner grids. At the start of an
FMG cycle, the solution and the right-hand side are restricted to the coarsest grid.
An advantage of these schemes is that they do not require diagonal ghost cells,
which saves signiﬁcant communication costs. A drawback is that interpola-
tion errors can be larger than with standard bilinear or trilinear interpolation,
somewhat reducing the multigrid convergence rate.
For restriction, the value of four (2D) or eight (3D) ﬁne grid values is
averaged to obtain a coarse grid value. Besides these built-in methods, users
can also deﬁne custom prolongation and restriction operators.
2.4. Multigrid cycles
Two standard multigrid cycles are included in the library [19, 18, 17]: the
V-cycle and the full multigrid (FMG) cycle, which are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
As the name suggests, a V-cycle goes from the ﬁnest grid to the coarsest grid
and then back to the ﬁnest grid. To explain the procedure, we introduce some
terminology: let v denote the approximate solution, f the right-hand side,
L the elliptic operator, r = f −Lv the residual, P a prolongation operator,
and R a restriction operator. Furthermore, a superscript h and H refer to
the current and the underlying coarse grid level.
During the downward part of the V-cycle, Ndown (default: two) smoothing
steps are performed at a grid level. Afterwards, the residual is computed as
rh = f h −Lh(vh).
The current approximation vh is then restricted to the coarse grid as vH =
R(vh), after which a copy vH
old = vH is stored. This copy is later used to
8
update the ﬁne-grid solution. The coarse-grid right-hand side is then updated
as
f H = R(rh) + LH(vH),
(8)
after which the procedure repeats itself, but now starting from the underlying
coarse grid.
On the coarsest grid, up to Nmax (default: 1000) smoothing steps are
performed until the residual is either below a user-deﬁned absolute threshold
(default: 10−8), or until it is reduced by a user-deﬁned factor (default: 10−8).
When the coarsest grid contains a large number of unknowns, it can be
beneﬁcial to use a direct solver to solve the coarse grid equations, but we
have not yet implemented this.
In the prolongation steps, the solution is updated with a correction from
the coarse grid as
vh = vh + P(vH −vH
old),
(9)
and afterwards Nup (default: two) smoothing steps are performed.
The FMG cycle consists of a number of V-cycles, as illustrated in ﬁgure 2.
Compared to V-cycles, FMG cycles perform additional smoothing at coarse
grid levels. This makes them a bit more expensive, but the advantage of
FMG cycles is that they can achieve convergence up to the discretization
error in one or two iterations.
If no initial guess for the solution is given, an initial guess of zero is used.
We use the restriction and prolongation operators described in section 2.3
for both V-cycles and FMG cycles. Whenever necessary, for example after
restriction/prolongation or after a smoothing step, ghost cells are updated,
see section 2.6.
2.5. Grid structure
The library supports quadtree/octree grids with Cartesian 2D/3D or
cylindrical 2D (r, z) geometries, see e.g. [23]. Quadtree grids consist of blocks
of Nx × Ny cells, which can be reﬁned by covering them with four reﬁned
blocks (their ‘children’), which each also contain Nx × Ny cells but have half
the grid spacing. An example of a quadtree grid is shown in ﬁgure 3. Octrees
are the 3D equivalent of quadtrees, so that the reﬁnement of a block creates
eight ‘children’. The multigrid library requires that the diﬀerence in reﬁne-
ment between adjacent blocks is at most one level; such quadtree/octree grids
are called 2:1 balanced.
9
Figure 3: Example of a quadtree grid. Each black square represents a grid block containing
4 × 4 cells. From left to right, the grid is reﬁned in the upper right corner.
When the multigrid library is coupled to an application code, it con-
structs a copy of the full AMR hierarchy of the application code together
with additional coarse grid levels. Applications codes therefore only need to
contain ﬁne grid data, and not the underlying coarse grid data. The library
also contains its own routines for parallel communication and the ﬁlling of
ghost cells, as described in sections 2.6 and 2.7.
The grid construction is performed in several steps. First, a user indicates
the quadtree/octree block size and the size of the unreﬁned computational
domain in the application code (in number of cells). The library will then
internally construct additional coarse grid levels, as illustrated below. After-
wards, the reﬁnement levels present in the application code are copied to the
multigrid library.
2.5.1. Construction of additional coarse grids
Suppose that a 2D application uses blocks of 82 cells and that its level
one grid contains 192 × 96 cells, see ﬁgure 4.
The library will then ﬁrst
construct the additional coarse grids given in table 1. The block size is kept
at 8 × 8 down to level −1. For levels −2 to −4, the block size is reduced all
the way down to 1 × 1 blocks. These extra grids are constructed to obtain a
coarsest grid with a small number of unknowns. On such a grid, a solution
can directly be obtained with a modest number of iterations of the smoother.
A coarsest grid with few unknowns can be obtained when the level one grid
size is a small number (e.g., 1, 3 or 5) times a power of two.
2.5.2. Copying the application’s grid reﬁnement
After the unreﬁned (level one) grid has been constructed in the multigrid
library, it can be linked to the application’s unreﬁned grid. In the application
code, each grid block has to store an integer indicating the index of that grid
block in the multigrid library. Similarly, grid blocks in the multigrid library
store pointers to the application’s code grid blocks.
10
Figure 4: Example of a 2D grid with two levels of reﬁnement, to help explain the con-
struction of grids in the multigrid library. The base grid contains 192 × 96 cells, which
corresponds to 24 × 12 blocks (shown in red) of 8 × 8 cells. Table 1 lists the additional
coarse grids that the multigrid library would construct.
grid level
mg
application
grid size
block size
Nblocks
3
✓
✓
irregular
8 × 8
80
2
✓
✓
irregular
8 × 8
144
1
✓
✓
192 × 96
8 × 8
24 × 12
0
✓
96 × 48
8 × 8
12 × 6
-1
✓
48 × 24
8 × 8
6 × 3
-2
✓
24 × 12
4 × 4
6 × 3
-3
✓
12 × 6
2 × 2
6 × 3
-4
✓
6 × 3
1 × 1
6 × 3
Table 1: Example of the additional coarse grids that would be constructed for an unreﬁned
domain of 192 × 96 cells with blocks of size 82, see ﬁgure 4. The check marks indicate
whether the grid level is present in the multigrid library and in the calling application.
Nblocks denotes the number of blocks per level in the multigrid hierarchy, so including
blocks covered by reﬁnement.
After the unreﬁned grids have been linked, the AMR structure can be
copied from the application code by looping over its grid blocks, starting at
level one. Reﬁned blocks can be added to the multigrid library by calling
built-in reﬁnement procedures, after which these reﬁned blocks again have
to be linked between the two codes. An example of the coupling procedure
can be found in the coupling module provided for MPI-AMRVAC.
2.5.3. Adapting the grid structure
When the mesh in the calling application changes, the mesh in the multi-
grid library can be adapted in the same way, or it can be constructed again
11
block size
1 ghost cell
2 ghost cells
3 ghost cells
82
1.56
2.25
3.06
162
1.27
1.56
1.89
322
1.13
1.27
1.41
83
1.95
3.38
5.36
163
1.42
1.95
2.60
323
1.20
1.42
1.67
Table 2: Memory cost of using grid blocks of given size with ghost cells, relative to the
cost without ghost cells. The values are computed as (N + 2Ngc)D/N D, where N is the
block size, Ngc the number of ghost cells, and D the problem dimension.
from scratch. To adapt an existing mesh the calling application should inform
the library about all blocks that were added, removed or transfered between
processors (for load balancing, see section 2.7). The computational cost of
constructing a new mesh is relatively modest: for the uniform-grid scaling
tests in section 3.3, it took about 0.3 s to construct a 10243 grid consisting
of octree blocks with 163 cells.
2.6. Ghost cells and boundary conditions
In the multigrid library all grid blocks have a layer of ghost cells around
them, which can contain data from neighboring blocks (potentially at a dif-
ferent reﬁnement level) or special values for boundary conditions. The usage
of ghost cells simpliﬁes the implementation of numerical methods, since they
do not need to take block boundaries into account. For simplicity and eﬃ-
ciency, the library currently uses only a single layer of ghost cells, without
diagonal and/or edge (in 3D) cells. Since the multigrid library uses its own
ghost cell routines, these restrictions do not apply to application codes, which
can use any number of ghost cells.
The downside of ghost cells is that additional memory is required, as
illustrated in table 2. Some AMR codes, such as Paramesh [24], therefore
provide the possibility to to compute ghost values when they are required
instead of permanently storing them. However, this adds some complexity
in the implementation of algorithms, for example because ghost cells cannot
be reused in two separate steps.
Ghost cells can be ﬁlled in three diﬀerent ways. If there is a neighboring
block (at the same reﬁnement level), ghost cells are simply copied from the
corresponding region. This is also performed at periodic boundaries.
12
 
 
c'
A
c
d
g
B'
a
b
B
C
B' = B + (C-A)/8
g = (B' + c')/2
c' = c +(c-d)/2
h
D
B
C
A
F
G
B'
B' = B + (C+F-A-G)/8
a)
b)
Figure 5: a) Illustration of the ghost cell scheme near a reﬁnement boundary in 2D. Fine-
grid values are indicated by a to d. The ghost cell next to c is located at g, and the
nearest coarse-grid value is indicated by B. The quantities at B’ and c’ are shown to help
explain how a value for g is obtained. Note that the coarse values A or C can be inside
ghost cells of the block containing B; values at such ghost cells are always available in our
implementation. b) In 3D, the procedure is almost identical. The only diﬀerence is how
the equivalent of B’ is determined, which is illustrated here.
Ghost cells near physical boundaries. If there is a physical boundary, ghost
cells are set so that the boundary condition is satisﬁed at boundary cell
faces. If the interior cell-centered value is φi and the ghost value is φg, then
a Dirichlet boundary condition φ = a at the cell face is set as φg = 2a −φi.
A Neumann boundary condition ∂xφ = b is set as φg = φi ± hx b, where hx
is the grid spacing and the sign depends on the direction the boundary is
facing. For free space boundary conditions (φ →0 for r →∞), we make use
of a FFT-based solver to set boundary conditions, see section 2.8.
Ghost cells near reﬁnement boundaries. Near reﬁnement boundaries, we em-
ploy the scheme illustrated in ﬁgure 5a to ﬁll ghost cells. The value B’ is
obtained by using the central-diﬀerence slope in the coarse grid cell. The
value at the cell face c’ is obtained by local extrapolation using two points,
and ﬁnally the ghost cell value g is the average of B’ and c’. For the other
ghost value h the procedure is geometrically identical. The approach extends
naturally to 3D, in which two central-diﬀerence slopes are used in the coarse
cells to obtain the equivalent of B’, as illustrated in ﬁgure 5b. An important
property of this ghost cell scheme, which is similar to the scheme presented
in [22], is that it gives the same coarse and (average) ﬁne gradient across the
13
reﬁnement boundary. In other words, we have that
D −B = (c −g)/2 + (a −h)/2,
(10)
where D = (a+b+c+d)/4 is the restriction of the ﬁne cells. For a constant-
coeﬃcient Poisson equation such as (1), the divergence theorem
Z
f dV =
{
ε∇φ · ⃗dS.
(11)
then shows that the integrated right-hand side is equal on the reﬁned patch
and on the underlying coarse grid approximation.
Near reﬁnement boundaries, ghost cell values depend on the interior val-
ues of the reﬁned block, as illustrated in ﬁgure 5. Since ghost cells are up-
dated after (and not during) a smoothing step, a somewhat slower damping
of errors is to be expected near reﬁnement boundaries.
2.7. Parallelization
We have made a number of choices to keep the parallel implementation
of the multigrid library relatively simple.
First, the full mesh geometry is stored on every processor. Of course, each
processor only allocates storage for the mesh data that it ‘owns’. A more
sophisticated approach would be to only store information about the local
mesh neighborhood for each processor. That would save memory, but also
signiﬁcantly complicate e.g. mesh construction, mesh adaptation and load
balancing.
Second, the multigrid library copies the mesh structure from the calling
AMR application, and it is assumed that 2:1 balance is already satisﬁed.
Third, the load balancing is also copied from the calling AMR application,
which means that all leaves (i.e., blocks with no further reﬁnement) are on
the same processors in the library as in the calling application. Copying data
between the calling application and the library on the leaf blocks therefore
involves no communication. This also means that the library only needs to
perform load balancing for parent blocks. Our implementation assigns each
parent block to the processor that contains most of its children, which is
applied recursively by going from ﬁner to coarser grids. In case of ties, the
processor which has the fewest blocks at a reﬁnement level is selected. This
type of load balancing minimizes the communication between children and
parent blocks.
14
On the coarsest grids in a multigrid hierarchy, there are too few unknowns
to keep all processors busy. Furthermore, the cost of communication on such
grids is often higher than computational costs. We therefore store the coars-
est grids on a single processor, more precisely those for which the number of
cells is not divisible by the block size. For the example of table 1, these are
the grids with block size 4 × 4 and smaller.
Parallel communication. As illustrated in ﬁgure 2, performing a multigrid
cycle involves quite a lot of communication between processors. After per-
forming a smoothing step, ghost cells have to be updated. Prolongation and
restriction also require data to be transferred between grid levels, as well as
an update of the ghost cells. For this reason, the multigrid library comes
with eﬃcient routines for ﬁlling ghost cells and communicating data.
The following data is communicated for the ghost cell, prolongation and
restriction routines:
• For ghost cell exchanges at the same reﬁnement level, the corresponding
interior cell region is sent from both sides.
• For ghost cells near a reﬁnement boundary, the coarse-side processor
interpolates values ‘in front of’ the cells of its ﬁne grid neighbor, see
ﬁgure 5. These values are then sent from coarse to ﬁne; there is no
communication from ﬁne to coarse.
• For prolongation, the coarse grid data is ﬁrst interpolated and then
sends it to its children1.
• For restriction, the ﬁne grid data is ﬁrst restricted and then sent to the
underlying coarse grid.
For each of the above cases, the size of the data transferred depends only
on the block size and the problem dimension. We avoid communication on
the coarsest grids, for which the block size is reduced, since these grids are
stored on a single processor.
The actual data transfer is performed using buﬀers, so that only a single
send and/or receive is performed between communicating processors. The
1It is more eﬃcient to send coarse data and to perform interpolation afterwards, but
this approach is less ﬂexible; for a variable coeﬃcient problem, it can for example be
beneﬁcial to change the interpolation scheme depending on the local coeﬃcients.
15
size of these buﬀers is computed after constructing the AMR grid; then it is
known how much data is sent and received between processors in the various
operations. Furthermore, the data in the send buﬀers is sorted so that it is
in ‘natural’ order for the receiving processor. This sorting is possible because
each grid block is identiﬁed by a global index, which determines the order in
which processors loop over the blocks.
After the sorted data has been received, operations such as the ﬁlling
of ghost cells, prolongation or restriction can be performed. Whenever data
from another processor is required, it is unpacked from the buﬀer correspond-
ing to that processor. If data from the same processor is required, it is locally
prepared as described above. The advantage of this buﬀered approach for
exchanging data is that it limits the number of MPI calls, which could other-
wise lead to signiﬁcant overhead. In section 3.3, we demonstrate the parallel
scaling of our approach.
2.8. Free space boundary conditions in 3D
Poisson’s equation sometimes has to be solved with free space boundary
conditions, i.e., φ →0 at inﬁnity, for example when computing the grav-
itational potential of an isolated system. Because of the 1/r decay of the
free-space Green’s function, enlarging the computational domain (and ap-
plying a Dirichlet zero boundary condition) gives a poor approximation of
the free-space solution.
A number of techniques exist to directly compute free-space solutions, see
e.g. [25, 26]. The most eﬃcient techniques rely on the fast Fourier transform
(FFT), so they can only be applied to uniform grids. To incorporate free
boundary conditions into our AMR-capable multigrid solver, we therefore
employ the following strategy. First, a free-space solution is computed on
a uniform grid, which can have a signiﬁcantly lower resolution than the full
AMR grid. Then standard multigrid is performed, using Dirichlet boundary
conditions interpolated from the uniform grid solution.
We use the 3D uniform-grid solver described in [25, 27], which employs
interpolating scaling functions and FFTs to obtain high-order solutions of
free-space problems. The solver is written in Fortran, licensed under a GPL
license, and it uses MPI-parallelism, which simpliﬁed its integration with our
multigrid library.
In our implementation the uniform grid always corresponds to one of
the fully reﬁned grid levels (so excluding partially reﬁned levels). Users can
control the cost of the uniform grid solver with a parameter c, which should
16
lie between zero and one. The uniform grid then corresponds to AMR level
l for which N(l) ≤c Ntotal, where N(l) denotes the number of unknowns at
AMR level l, and Ntotal denotes the total number of unknowns.
After constructing the uniform grid, including a layer of ghost cells, the
right-hand side of the problem is restricted to it.
The direct solver then
computes the free-space solution in parallel, using eight-order accurate in-
terpolating scaling functions. We extract the boundary planes, and linearly
interpolate them to obtain Dirichlet boundary conditions for the multigrid
solver at all grid levels. Afterwards, one or more FMG or V-cycles can be
performed to obtain a solution on the full AMR grid, using the uniform grid
solution as an initial guess.
The coupled approach described above has two advantages: it can handle
AMR grids, it can be more eﬃcient and scale better than a direct solver, and
it requires no modiﬁcation of the multigrid routines. Potential drawbacks
are that the multigrid solution is only second order accurate, and that the
accuracy near boundaries is reduced when a too coarse grid is used for the
direct solver. How ﬁne the uniform grid needs to be compared to the full
AMR grid depends on the application, e.g., on the distance between sources
and the domain boundary, and on the required accuracy near the boundary.
3. Testing the library
3.1. Convergence test
To study the convergence behavior of the multigrid solver, we solve the
following 3D test problem on a unit cube centered at the origin:
∇2φ = f,
f = ∇2φsol,
(12)
φsol = cos(π⃗n · ⃗x) + 10 exp(−100|⃗x|2),
with ⃗n = (1, 2, 3).
The right-hand side f is computed analytically, and
Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed using the solution values at the
boundary. We consider three types of numerical grid. The base case has
uniform reﬁnement using 643 cells. To test the eﬀect of reﬁnement boundaries
on the convergence behavior, we add two extra levels of reﬁnement covering
a volume of 0.53 and 0.253, respectively (so that each level again contains
643 cells). These reﬁnements are either placed at the center of the domain,
or around (−0.25, −0.25, −0.25). In the latter case, the reﬁnement is in the
17
‘wrong’ place, as it leads to a reﬁnement corner at the center of the domain,
where the solution has a sharp peak.
Figure 6 shows the residual r = f −∇2φ versus FMG iteration. Two
downward and two upward smoothing steps were taken per iteration. The
residual reduction factor per iteration is reduced when reﬁnement is present.
This is a result of our ghost cell procedure near reﬁnement boundaries, see
section 2.6, which reduces the convergence rate.
The residual is reduced
up to machine precision after about 10 iterations. Due to the algorithmic
steps involved, such as evaluating expressions like equation (3), the minimum
residual that can be obtained is proportional to ϵmachh−2|φ|, where ϵmach ≈
10−16 is the machine’s precision, h is the mesh spacing and |φ| is the local
amplitude of the computed solution.
Regardless of the lower reduction factor with reﬁnement boundaries, ﬁg-
ure 6 shows that the discretization error is reached in one or two FMG iter-
ations. The test problem has a steep Gaussian at the center, which is where
the largest discretization errors occur for the uniform grid case. With the
centered reﬁnement errors are indeed signiﬁcantly reduced. In the L∞norm,
the error is reduced by a factor 20, slightly more than the factor 16 expected
from a second-order discretization with two levels of reﬁnement. With the
corner reﬁnement, the errors hardly change, showing that ‘wrongly’ placed
reﬁnements are handled well by our approach.
3.2. Free space solutions in 3D
To test our method with free space boundary conditions in 3D, see section
2.8, we solve a free space Poisson problem with a Gaussian right-hand side
∇2φ = f,
(13)
f(⃗r) =
−1
σ3π3/2 exp(−|⃗r −⃗r0|2/σ2),
where ⃗r0 is the center of the Gaussian and σ controls its width. The solution
is then given by
φ(⃗r) = 1
4π erf(|⃗r −⃗r0|/σ)/|⃗r −⃗r0|,
(14)
where erf denotes the error function. The computational domain is again a
unit cube centered at the origin, and the Gaussian is located at the origin with
σ = 0.1. Figure 7 shows the L2-norm of the error after two FMG cycles versus
the grid resolution. Two curves are shown, for which the direct solver is called
18
1e-12
1e-10
1e-08
1e-06
1e-04
1e-02
1e+00
1e+02
2
4
6
8
10
residual (L2)
FMG iteration
uniform
center
corner
1e-12
1e-10
1e-08
1e-06
1e-04
1e-02
1e+00
1e+02
2
4
6
8
10
12
residual (L∞)
FMG iteration
uniform
center
corner
0.001
0.01
1
2
3
4
error (L2)
FMG iteration
uniform
center
corner
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
2
3
4
error (L∞)
FMG iteration
uniform
center
corner
Figure 6: Convergence test results for the test problem of equation (12) with a sharp
Gaussian peak. Top row: the residual in L2 norm (left) and L∞norm (right) versus FMG
iteration. After about 10 iterations the residual is reduced up to machine precision, see
the text for details. Bottom row: the L2 norm and L∞norm of the solution error. After
two FMG iterations, the error has converged to the discretization error, which is why it
is no longer decreasing. The uniform case contains 643 cells, and the ‘center’ and ‘corner’
case contain two additional levels of reﬁnement, which if placed properly (the ‘center’ case)
indeed decreases the error.
19
1e-07
1e-06
1e-05
1e-04
1e-03
1e-02
1e-01
1e+00
10
100
1000
error
Nx
lmax −1, L∞
lmax −1, L2
lmax −2, L∞
lmax −2, L2
Figure 7: L2 and L∞norm of the error for the 3D free-space test problem given by
equation (13). The error is shown versus the number of grid points per dimension. The
labels lmax −1 and lmax −2 indicate at which grid level the direct free-space solver was
called to obtain boundary conditions for the multigrid procedure, where lmax denotes the
highest grid level.
on levels lmax−1 and lmax−2 respectively, where lmax denotes the highest grid
level. For grids larger than 643, there is hardly any diﬀerence between the two
curves, and they show second order convergence. For simplicity, uniformly
reﬁned grids are used, but the multigrid solver also works for AMR meshes.
The cost of the direct solver is relatively small, because it is only called
once per right-hand side on a coarser grid, and because the direct solver itself
is quite eﬃcient [25].
3.3. Strong scaling tests
We now look at the performance and scaling of the geometric multigrid
library, by solving Poisson’s equation with unit right-hand side
∇2φ = 1,
(15)
on a unit cube, with φ set to zero at the boundaries. We measure the time
per multigrid cycle for both FMG and V-cycles by averaging over 100 cycles.
For both types of cycles two upward and two downward smoothing steps
with a Jacobi smoother were performed, and octree blocks of size 163 were
used. The scaling results presented below were obtained on nodes with two
14-core Intel Xeon E5-2680v4 processors, for a total of 28 cores per node.
In all tests, one MPI process per core was used. We present strong scaling
20
0.01
0.1
1
10
10
100
1000
time/cycle (s)
CPU cores
uniform grid
5123 FMG
V-cycle
10243 FMG
V-cycle
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
100
1000
relative cost (%)
CPU cores
coarsen
smoother
smoother g.c.
prolong
Figure 8: Left: strong scaling results for a problem size of 5123 and 10243, showing the
time per FMG cycle and per V-cycle. Right: breakdown of the computational cost of an
FMG cycle for a 10243 grid versus the number of CPU cores used.
results, which means that the problem size is kept ﬁxed but the number of
processors is increased.
Normally, the library copies its load balancing from another application,
as discussed in section 2.7. For the tests presented below, the library was
used by itself, in which case it performs a division of blocks over processors
similar to a Morton order, which is also used in MPI-AMRVAC [28, 23].
Figure 8 shows strong scaling results for a uniform grid containing either
5123 or 10243 cells. For the 5123 case, scaling results look good up to 448
cores, but with 1792 cores the performance is worse than with 896 cores.
This makes sense: even on the ﬁnest grid, the number of unknowns is only
about 423 using 1792 cores. For the 10243 test case, scaling is closer to ideal
(i.e., closer to a straight line in the ﬁgure), even using 1792 cores. The ﬁgure
also shows that the cost of a V-cycle is lower than that of an FMG cycle.
The diﬀerence increases with the number of cores, due to the extra work on
coarse grids with FMG cycles, see ﬁgure 2.
A breakdown of the relative cost of an FMG cycle for the 10243 case is
also shown in ﬁgure 8. Shown is the percentage of time spent on the trans-
fer to coarse grids, the smoother (excluding communication), the ghost cell
exchange during smoothing steps (labeled smoother g.c.), and the prolonga-
tion to ﬁner grids. With an increasing number of cores, less time is spent on
computation compared to communication.
Figure 9 shows strong scaling results on a reﬁned grid with a total of ﬁve
levels. Each grid level contains either 5123 or 10243 cells, and the reﬁnements
21
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
10
100
1000
time/cycle (s)
CPU cores
AMR grid (5 levels)
512 FMG
V-cycle
1024 FMG
V-cycle
Figure 9: Strong scaling results on an AMR grid with 5 levels, with each level containing
5123 or 10243 cells. The grid structure is illustrated on the right.
are placed at the center of the domain, as illustrated in the ﬁgure. Compared
to the uniform grid cases, there are about ﬁve times as many unknowns.
The duration of V-cycles is indeed about ﬁve times longer, although the
parallel scaling is improved due to the larger total number of unknowns. The
diﬀerence in cost between V-cycles and FMG cycles is larger than for the
uniform grid case, due to the extra work the FMG cycles perform on coarse
grids, which now contain a signiﬁcant number of unknowns.
4. Divergence cleaning
This section is speciﬁcally about divergence cleaning in magnetohydro-
dynamic (MHD) simulations. For readers not interested in this particular
application, we provide a short summary of the main results below:
• We compare elliptic, hyperbolic, and parabolic divergence cleaning for
several test cases in 2D/3D Cartesian and 2.5D cylindrical geometries,
with AMR.
• With the multigrid library, divergence cleaning up to machine precision
requires the magnetic ﬁeld to be deﬁned at cell faces.
However, in
MPI-AMRVAC the ﬁeld is deﬁned at cell centers, and we show that elliptic
divergence cleaning can then still be applied successfully.
• We show that a fourth-order discretization of the right-hand side (∇· ⃗B)
can be beneﬁcial for elliptic divergence cleaning.
22
• The tests demonstrate the coupling of the multigrid solver to MPI-AMRVAC.
The cost of runs was not signiﬁcantly increased (by less than 10%) when
elliptic divergence cleaning was performed once per time step.
• The tests show that for typical problems, divergence cleaning methods
play a similar role as the slope limiters: diﬀerent methods give slightly
diﬀerent results and there is no single best method.
Maxwell’s equations state that ∇· ⃗B = 0, but this constraint does not
automatically hold in numerical MHD computations [29]. If no special care
is taken, ∇· ⃗B can grow at each step through discretization errors, leading to
unphysical results. Therefore, a number of methods has been developed to
ensure ∇· ⃗B remains small compared to discretization and truncation errors.
With the Hodge-Helmholtz projection method [29, 30], the divergence is
cleaned by solving Poisson’s equation:
∇· ∇φ = ∇· ⃗Bold,
(16)
⃗Bnew = ⃗Bold −∇φ.
(17)
Below, we call this approach elliptic divergence cleaning, and we will use
multigrid to solve Poisson’s equation. Another approach is to add source
terms to the MHD equations to control ∇· ⃗B errors, as is done in the eight-
wave formulation of Powell [31], or its variants which only aﬀect the induction
equation [32, 33]. The MHD equations can also be modiﬁed to ensure trans-
port and/or damping of ∇· ⃗B errors. The extra terms can have a parabolic
(diﬀusive) character, as in the ‘diﬀusive’ method described in [34] which only
adds a diﬀusion term to the induction equation. When using an extended
version of the MHD equations with a variable that links to ∇· ⃗B error damp-
ing and transport, the method can also have a hyperbolic character, as in the
Generalized Lagrange multiplier (GLM) method described in [35] and the
recently derived ideal GLM-MHD scheme presented in [36].
Constrained transport (CT) methods [37, 38, 39] were designed to pre-
serve ∇· ⃗B = 0 up to machine precision, typically by deﬁning the mag-
netic ﬁeld at cell faces and the electric ﬁeld at cell corners. Variants that
do not rely on a staggered representation of the magnetic ﬁeld have been
discussed in [40] .
CT methods have been made compatible with adap-
tive mesh reﬁnement [41, 42, 43, 44, 45], but their implementation is non-
trivial. Moreover, while CT methods ensure one particular discretization of
23
the monopole constraint in machine precision, any other discretization will
show truncation errors in places of large gradients, and especially at dis-
continuities. For mesh-free computations, [46] recently advocated the use
of a constrained-gradient method, which in essence uses an iterative least-
square minimization involving the magnetic ﬁeld gradient tensor. Mesh-free
smoothed-particle MHD implementations have also successfully devised con-
strained hyperbolic/parabolic divergence cleaning methods, where the wave
cleaning speeds become space and time dependent [47].
An extensive comparison of ∇· ⃗B cleaning techniques was performed
in [40], where a suite of rigorous test problems on uniform Cartesian grids
showed that a projection scheme could rival central diﬀerence and constrained
transport schemes in accuracy and reliability. Further comparisons have been
performed in e.g. [48, 4], where especially [48] demonstrates some deﬁciencies
in using divergence cleaning steps versus CT, when applied to supernova-
induced MHD turbulence.
In the tests below, we compare elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic diver-
gence cleaning. ‘Elliptic’ refers to the multigrid-based projection method de-
scribed in the next section, ‘parabolic’ to the diﬀusive approach of [34], and
‘hyperbolic’ to the EGLM-MHD method described in [35]. For the EGLM-
MHD approach, we set the parameter ch to the globally fastest wave speed,
and we use c2
p/ch = 2h to balance decay and transport of the ψ variable,
where h is the ﬁnest grid spacing.
Below, a suﬃx 4th indicates that ∇· ⃗B terms have been computed with a
fourth-order accurate scheme, which is relevant for the elliptic and parabolic
methods.
4.1. Elliptic divergence cleaning
In MPI-AMRVAC, the magnetic ﬁeld is deﬁned at cell centers. To compute
its divergence in a Cartesian geometry, we consider two discretizations for
∇· ⃗B = ∂xBx + ∂yBy + ∂zBz. Each derivative can either be approximated
with second order central diﬀerences
∂xBx ≈Bx,i+1 −Bx,i−1
2∆x
,
(18)
or with a fourth-order diﬀerencing scheme
∂xBx ≈−Bx,i+2 + 8Bx,i+1 −8Bx,i−1 + Bx,i−2
12∆x
.
(19)
24
Afterwards, we update the magnetic ﬁeld according to equation (17), and
update the energy density as
enew = eold + 1
2
 B2
new −B2
old

,
(20)
which keeps the thermal pressure constant [40], which can be important to
avoid negative pressures. A downside is that equation (20) does not conserve
total energy.
For the correction step, we evaluate ∇φ with second-order
central diﬀerences.
The multigrid solver described in this paper is cell-centered, and with its
standard 5/7-point stencil the divergence ∇· ∇φ is computed from a face-
centered quantity (∇φ). Since in MPI-AMRVAC ∇· ⃗B is the divergence of a cell-
centered quantity, the two divergences do not exactly match2. This means
that after the projection step, ∇· ⃗B will be non-zero in both the second and
fourth order scheme, although diﬀerences will be small for smooth proﬁles.
Based on the results presented here and those of [40], we think this is not
necessarily a problem.
With a staggered discretization, in which the magnetic ﬁeld is deﬁned at
cell faces, the two divergences in equation (16) exactly match. Divergence
cleaning can then be performed up to machine precision.
The multigrid
library is currently used in the BHAC code [45], which employs such a staggered
discretization, to ensure that initial magnetic ﬁelds are divergence-free up to
machine precision.
4.2. Field loop advection
We ﬁrst consider the 2D ﬁeld loop advection test described in [49], which
was also used more recently in e.g. [46]. A weak magnetic ﬁeld loop is ad-
vected through a periodic domain given by x ∈[−1, 1] and y ∈[−1/2, 1/2].
The initial conditions are ρ = 1, p = 1, (vx, vy) = (2, 1), and the magnetic
ﬁeld is computed from a vector potential whose only non-zero component is
Az =
(
A0(R0 −
p
x2 + y2)
for x2 + y2 ≤R2
0
0
for x2 + y2 > R2
0
,
2In principle, it is possible to use an operator with a wider stencil to ensure ∇· ⃗B = 0
up to machine precision. However, this would make the solver more costly and also lead
to a decoupling of unknowns, as discussed in e.g. [48].
25
t = 0
t = 2
t = 4
t = 6
t = 8
t = 10
Figure 10: Example of the evolution of the magnetic ﬁeld strength for the advected ﬁeld
loop test with parabolic divergence cleaning and the ˇCada slope limiter. At t = 10, the
loop has translated 10 times (horizontally and vertically). The ﬁgures show half of the
computational domain, namely x ∈[−1/2, 1/2] and y ∈[−1/2, 1/2].
where A0 = 10−3 and R0 = 0.3. We numerically evaluate Bx = ∂yAz and
By = −∂xAz using second-order central diﬀerencing. Inside the magnetized
ﬁeld loop the plasma beta is β = 2p/B2 = 2 · 106, so that this is eﬀectively
a hydrodynamics problem in which the magnetic ﬁeld is a passive scalar.
Nevertheless, its solution can be sensitive to the divergence cleaning method
used [49, 46].
We simulate this system up to t = 10 on a uniform 256 × 128 grid (AMR
tests follow in the next subsection), with a grid spacing h = 1/128.
An
example of the evolution is shown in ﬁgure 10, which was obtained using the
parabolic approach. Fluxes were computed with the HLL scheme, using a
CFL number of 0.5. For ﬁgure 10, a ˇCada limiter [50] was used to reconstruct
cell face values for ﬂux computations. At t = 10, the ﬁeld loop has moved
through the system 10 times. We run simulations with several combinations
of slope limiters and ∇· ⃗B methods, always employing the same HLL scheme.
These slope limiters are used in MPI-AMRVAC to reconstruct cell-face values
from cell-centered ones for the ﬂux computation [23]. Figure 11 shows the
magnetic ﬁeld strength | ⃗B| at t = 10 for three types of limiters, described
in [50] (‘ˇCada’), [51] (‘Koren’), and [52] (‘van Leer’), for ﬁve diﬀerent cleaning
approaches.
The computational cost of the MPI-AMRVAC runs hardly depended on the
divergence cleaning method that was used, with run times diﬀering by less
than 10%. The choice of limiter had a greater impact. Runs with the more
complex ‘ˇCada’ limiter took up to 40% longer than those with the simple
van Leer limiter (which is symmetric), and runs with the Koren limiter were
in between.
With a second-order evaluation of ∇· ⃗B, elliptic and hyperbolic diver-
gence cleaning give similar results, somewhat worse than those obtained with
26
elliptic
elliptic-4th
parabolic
parabolic-4th
hyperbolic
ˇCada
Koren
van Leer
Figure 11: Magnetic ﬁeld strength at t = 10 for the advected ﬁeld loop test. The columns
correspond to diﬀerent divergence-cleaning methods, and a suﬃx 4th indicates a fourth-
order scheme is used to evaluate ∇· ⃗B terms. The rows correspond to diﬀerent slope
limiters. The ﬁgures show half of the computational domain, namely x ∈[−1/2, 1/2] and
y ∈[−1/2, 1/2].
hyperbolic cleaning. With a fourth-order evaluation of ∇· ⃗B, elliptic cleaning
gives the best results, which also appear to be less sensitive to the limiter
used. It is to be noted that more structure is visible in Fig. 11 outside the
loop than shown in e.g. [46], but this is due to the combination of using a dif-
ferent color scheme (our color legend is indicated in the ﬁgure), and because
we show | ⃗B| instead of B2.
Figure 12 shows the L2-norm of ∇· ⃗B, deﬁned as
|∇· ⃗B|2 =
s
1
V
Z
|∇· ⃗B|2dV ,
(21)
using a second-order and a fourth-order cell-centered evaluation. The ellip-
tic schemes gives the smallest |∇· ⃗B|2 when the same second/fourth-order
discretization is used to evaluate |∇· ⃗B|2 and the right-hand side of eq. (16).
However, ∇· ⃗B being small in one discretization does not mean it is small in
another one, as was as observed in [40].
The L2-norm of | ⃗B −⃗Bsol| is shown in ﬁgure 13, where ⃗Bsol is the approxi-
mate solution to the problem, only taking into account advection of the initial
condition. From this comparison, the elliptic-4th and parabolic-4th schemes
27
1e-07
1e-06
1e-05
1e-04
1e-03
0
2
4
6
8
10
time
|∇· ⃗B|2 (second order)
1e-07
1e-06
1e-05
1e-04
1e-03
0
2
4
6
8
10
time
|∇· ⃗B|2 (fourth order)
elliptic
elliptic-4th
parabolic
parabolic-4th
hyperbolic
Figure 12: The L2-norm of ∇· ⃗B versus time for the advected ﬁeld loop test on a uniform
256 ×128 grid. We only show the results for the ˇCada limiter. On the left, the L2-norm is
computed using a second order scheme for ∇· ⃗B, on the right using a fourth order scheme.
give the best results, whereas the standard elliptic and parabolic schemes
perform a bit worse than other methods. Since the cost of a fourth-order
evaluation of ∇· ⃗B is negligible, the results suggest that such an evaluation
can be recommended. In conclusion, we ﬁnd that elliptic divergence cleaning
works well to control monopole errors for this test case.
4.3. Advecting a current-carrying cylinder (mach 0.5)
Although the previous setup became a popular test for magnetic diver-
gence control, it is not a realistic test case for MHD applications since it
only probes the very high plasma beta (order one million to inﬁnity) regime.
Moreover, the initial condition is not a true MHD equilibrium, has an inﬁnite
current at r = 0 together with a current sheet at its boundary R0, and the
radially inward Lorentz force must actually set up sausage type compressions
of the loop, which could well be responsible for the ﬂuctuations seen in the
environment of the advected loop in Fig. 10.
Below, we introduce a more realistic advection test, which can be used to
demonstrate a number of typical computational challenges in MHD applica-
tions: (1) combining high and low plasma beta regimes, (2) ensuring force
balance, and (3) handling surface current contributions in AMR evolutions.
4.3.1. Description of the general test case
We set up a current-carrying magnetic ﬂux tube embedded in a uniform,
magnetized external medium, ensuring that a true MHD equilibrium is real-
28
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0
2
4
6
8
10
|∆⃗B|2/A0
time
elliptic
elliptic-4th
parabolic
parabolic-4th
hyperbolic
Figure 13: The L2-norm of the error in the magnetic ﬁeld | ⃗B −⃗Bsol| divided by the initial
amplitude A0 = 10−3, shown for the advected ﬁeld loop test with the ˇCada limiter.
ized. This is then further combined with a uniform ﬂow ﬁeld, that addresses
whether Galilean invariance is obtained.
Using the scale invariance of the MHD equations [53], we exploit units
where the radius of the ﬂux tube is equal to unity, where the density external
to the loop is ﬁxed at ρext = 1, while the external plasma pressure is pext =
1/γ. This makes the external sound speed and its unit length crossing time
the reference speed and time unit, respectively. The initial ﬂow ﬁeld is then
controlled fully by its Mach number M0 and orientation angles ϕ0 and θ0,
such that the constant speed components are found from
vx(t = 0)
=
M0 sin θ0 cos ϕ0 ,
(22)
vy(t = 0)
=
M0 sin θ0 sin ϕ0 ,
(23)
vz(t = 0)
=
M0 cos θ0 .
(24)
We align the ﬂux tube with the z-direction, and use a [−L, L]2 fully periodic
domain, where we resort to a 2.5D (invariance in z) computation, although
the problem can also be simulated in full 3D. The external medium has a
uniform magnetization, which is determined by the corresponding inverse
plasma beta parameter β−1
ext as Bz,ext =
p
2β−1
ext/γ.
The ﬂux tube itself has internal variation, and is a force-free cylindrical
equilibrium introduced in [54], where the physics of solar ﬂares was discussed.
For solar coronal applications, ensuring a force-free equilibrium, which guar-
antees ⃗J × ⃗B = ⃗0 without enforcing a vanishing current ⃗J = ∇× ⃗B, is a
29
typical computational challenge. The internal variation for r =
p
x2 + y2 ≤1
is given by
ρint(r)
=
ρ0(1 −(1 −d)r2) ,
(25)
Bz,int(r)
=
B0
1 + c2r2 ,
(26)
Bθ,int(r)
=
crB0
1 + c2r2 .
(27)
The parameters ρ0, B0 and c are best controlled by dimensionless numbers
which quantify the pitch and strength of the magnetic ﬁeld variation. The d
parameter quantiﬁes the internal density contrast d = ρ(1)/ρ(0). Introducing
the q-factor at the tube radius
q(1) = πBz(1)
LBθ(1),
along with the plasma beta at the ﬂux tube radius β(1), as well as the ratio
R of the Alfv´en speed at r = 0 to the external sound speed, we can deduce
that
c
=
π
Lq(1) ,
(28)
pint
=
β(1)(1 + β−1
ext)
γ(β(1) + 1) ,
(29)
B0
=
s
2pint(1 + c2)
β(1)
,
(30)
ρ0
=
B2
0
R2 .
(31)
The ﬂux tube is internally force-free and represents a nonlinear force-free
ﬁeld conﬁguration where ⃗J = [2c/(1 + c2r2)] ⃗B, while there is a constant
pitch q(r) = q(1). The embedded conﬁguration is fully force-balanced since
the above relations enforce the total pressure balance across the loop radius.
Any combination of input parameters M0, θ0, ϕ0, β−1
ext, q(1), β(1), d, and
R represents a meaningful test for which the exact solution is known: the
ﬂux tube will be advected at the prescribed constant speed. These param-
eters could explore regimes that are particularly challenging for numerical
treatments, like taking the pitch such that the ﬂux tube is liable to kink in-
stability, or advecting at highly supersonic speeds, or verifying very low beta
30
behavior, etc. The edge of the ﬂux tube carries a surface current, where den-
sity, pressure and magnetic ﬁeld components change discontinuously. This is
typical for many solar, astrophysical or laboratory plasma conﬁgurations.
4.3.2. Results for a particular sets of parameters
We here focus on the particular case where L = 2, d = 0.05, M0 = 0.5
(i.e. Mach 0.5 advection), φ0 = 45◦, θ0 = 70◦, β(1) = 0.05 (i.e. a truly low
beta ﬂux tube), q(1) = 1.2 (such that it is stable to external kink modes
through the Kruskal-Shafranov limit), R = 1, and taking β−1
ext = 0.05 (i.e. a
high beta surrounding medium). We perform 2.5D simulations using a three-
step Runge-Kutta integrator with the HLL scheme combined with a Koren
limiter, and a Courant parameter of 0.8. Parabolic and elliptic divergence
cleaning is applied, using a fourth order discretization of ∇· ⃗B terms. We use
a base resolution per direction of 128 with four grid levels, which eﬀectively
gives a 10242 resolution. We run until normalized time t = 10, at which time
the ﬂux tube is almost advected back to its original position. Grid reﬁnement
is handled as follows: we enforce the maximal reﬁnement level to resolve the
region that is initially between 0.9 < r < 1.1, to accurately treat the surface
discontinuities during the entire evolution.
Figure 14 shows the error in the magnetic ﬁeld strength at t = 10 using
elliptic divergence cleaning. The error is concentrated at the boundary of the
ﬂux rope, where there is a surface current and a jump in density. The grid
structure at t = 10 is also shown in ﬁgure. With the parabolic approach, the
results are nearly identical.
Figure 15 shows the average magnitude of ⃗J × ⃗B in the region inside,
outside and at the boundary of the ﬂux rope. Results are shown for both the
elliptic and parabolic approach, but only small diﬀerences between the two
methods can be observed. Note that the simulation is nearly force-free inside
and outside the ﬂux rope. At the edge of the ﬂux rope ⃗J × ⃗B is signiﬁcantly
larger, due to the numerical discretization errors at the ﬂux rope boundary.
We remark that with hyperbolic divergence cleaning, we obtain nearly
identical results. In conclusion, this test case shows that for a physically
realistic test case, the type of divergence cleaning has less eﬀect than for
the test problem of section 4.2. It also demonstrates that our divergence
cleaning methods, and more speciﬁcally the elliptic approach, can handle
adaptive mesh reﬁnement.
31
B - Bsol
1
2
3
4
refinement level
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
Figure 14: The error in the magnetic ﬁeld magnitude at t = 10 for the Gold-Hoyle force-
free ﬂux rope advection test, shown in the full [−2, 2]2 domain. The errors are localized
at the surface of the ﬂux rope, where there is a surface current and a jump in density.
The ﬁgure shows results for the multigrid approach (elliptic-4th). The four reﬁnement
levels are indicated by gray-to-white colors, with the ﬁnest (white) grid having a spacing
of about 4 × 10−3.
0.00001
0.00010
0.00100
0.01000
0.10000
1.00000
10.00000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
edge
inside
outside
|JxB|/V
time
parabolic-4th
elliptic-4th
Figure 15: The average magnitude of ⃗J × ⃗B in three regions: the region outside the
ﬂux rope (r > 1.1), the region inside the ﬂux rope (r < 0.9) and the region in between
(0.9 < r < 1.1), where r = 0 corresponds to the center of the ﬂux rope.
32
4.4. Modeling magnetized jets (2.5D and 3D)
A ﬁnal demonstration of the multigrid-based divergence cleaning method-
ology focuses on a typical astrophysical application: the propagation of a
strongly magnetized, supersonic and super-Alfv´enic jet. We perform both
2.5D axisymmetric and 3D Cartesian simulations. The conﬁguration is bor-
rowed from [55], where relativistic jets with helical ﬁeld topologies were stud-
ied in axisymmetry. We here use the same magnetic ﬁeld topology in the
initial conditions, and evolve purely Newtonian cases, so we take parameters
similar to the non-relativistic jet case from [55].
4.4.1. Description of the test case
At t = 0, the jet occupies a ﬁnite region R < Rj and Z < Zj where the
(normalized) density is ρj = 1, while the surrounding medium has a higher
density ρc = 10: the under-dense jet is entering a denser ‘cloud’ region. We
take the domain size as follows: R ∈[0, 30] and Z ∈[0, 90], while Rj = 1.5
and Zj = 3.0. The jet itself has a twisted ﬁeld topology with an azimuthal
ﬁeld component in the jet region given by
Bϕ = tanh R
5 ,
(32)
while this azimuthal ﬁeld vanishes in the surroundings. Note again how this
setup thereby necessarily involves surface current distributions (located at
the edge of the jet region). The other magnetic ﬁeld components are
BR
=
2Rj
Zj

Z
Zj
3
tanh

Z
Zj
4
tanh

R
Rj
2
R
Rj cosh

Z
Zj
4
,
(33)
BZ
=
Bc +
1

cosh

R
Rj
22
cosh

Z
Zj
4 .
(34)
This magnetic ﬁeld setup is analytically divergence-free (as it should), and
ensures that the jet is entering an almost uniformly magnetized cloud region
where the initial ﬁeld strength has the ‘cloud’ value Bc = 0.01. The initial
pressure distribution follows from
p = pj + 1
2 −1
2
 B2
ϕ(R, Z) + B2
Z(R, Z)

,
(35)
33
where we take the jet pressure parameter pj = 2: this makes the internal
jet region slightly under-pressured with respect to the external medium, and
an order of magnitude hotter than its surroundings. Finally, the ﬂow ﬁeld ⃗v
vanishes at t = 0 outside the jet region, but within the jet follows from
vR
=
0 ,
(36)
vZ
=
α
Bϕ
(R/5)√ρj
,
(37)
vϕ
=
Bϕ
√ρj
.
(38)
The parameter α = 6.0. These choices turn the jet Mach number vZ/cs ≈3
while its Alfv´en Mach number vZ/vA ≈6 (both of these quantities vary with
radius and relate to the local sound speed cs =
p
γp/ρ and Alfv´en speed
vA = B/√ρ). The ratio of speciﬁc heats is ﬁxed at γ = 5/3. In accord
with the frequently invoked equipartition argument for astrophysical jets,
the plasma beta internal to the jet is of order β = 2p/B2 ≈4, while it is
about 50000 in the cloud region.
4.4.2. Computational domain and reﬁnement
In 2.5D, the resolution uses a coarse 32 × 64 base grid, allowing a total
of 6 AMR levels (i.e. an eﬀective resolution of 1024 × 2048). Reﬁnement
uses the Lohner estimator, this time taking in weighted information from
ρ, mR = ρvR and Bϕ in a 0.5 −0.25 −0.25 ratio. Maximal resolution is
enforced within the region R < 3Rj and Z < 3Zj. Boundary conditions use
the usual (a)symmetric combinations to handle the R = 0 symmetry axis
and extrapolate all variables at side and top in a zero-gradient fashion. The
bottom boundary uses the analytic initial conditions within R < Rj, and
adopts a reﬂective boundary beyond.
In 3D, our setup adopts the same physical parameters, but this time in
a 3D Cartesian (x, y, z) box of size [−30, 30] × [−30, 30] × [0, 90], where the
z axis coincides with the symmetry axis employed in the 2.5D runs (making
R =
p
x2 + y2). To avoid an artiﬁcial m = 2 selection eﬀect in the way non-
axisymmetric modes with azimuthal mode number m ̸= 0 develop from the
noise (inherent to doing cylindrical problems on a Cartesian grid), we used
a deterministic incompressible velocity perturbation consisting of 7 mode
numbers m = 1, . . . , 7 derived from ψ = P
m Am cos(mϕ + φm) exp(−[(R −
0.75Rj)/Rj]2) such that δ⃗v = ∇×ψ(x, y)ˆez. This is applied in the ghost cells
34
at the bottom (z = 0) boundary only, where we add it to the ﬁxed velocity
ﬁeld providing the jet conditions. The 7 amplitudes are chosen such that a
maximal amplitude for each mode is Am ≤0.05. In 3D, our base resolution is
64×64×96, with 5 reﬁnement levels to get to 1024×1024×1536 eﬀectively.
Reﬁnement in 3D is based on density only, augmented with user-enforced ge-
ometric criteria, where e.g. the maximal resolution is always attained within
the region R < 3Rj and Z < 3Zj. Boundary conditions at all sides and top
extrapolate primitive variables using Neumann zero-gradient prescriptions.
The bottom boundary ﬁxes the entire initial condition, augmented with the
δ⃗v addition, within the jet zone, while reﬂective boundaries are used beyond
R > Rj.
4.4.3. Results
We run till time t = 60, such that the jet progressed up to about z ≈60.
We use a strong-stability preserving Runge-Kutta scheme (its implementa-
tion in MPI-AMRVAC is demonstrated in [3]), an HLLC discretization, and
Piecewise Parabolic (PPM) reconstruction. Runs diﬀer only in their diver-
gence cleaning approach. We anticipate many turbulent features related to
ﬂuid instabilities, waves, rarefactions and shocks, as typical for under-dense
supersonic jets, but all diﬀerences in the jet morphology here entirely relate
to the error control on magnetic monopoles.
In Fig. 16(a), we show the density distribution for the axisymmetric sim-
ulations at t = 60, comparing the hyperbolic with the elliptic method for
divergence control.
Naturally, many details diﬀer between the two cases,
although both recover the richness in internal jet beam shocks, ﬂuid insta-
bilities developing at the leading contact interface between jet and surround-
ings, and the turbulent backﬂows where many vortical structures exist. The
shocked cloud matter is riddled with shocks. Repeated deformations of the
contact interface shed plasma into the backﬂow surrounding the jet spine.
A direct comparison of the monopole errors at t = 60 is given in Fig. 16(b).
We here show a second order central diﬀerence evaluation of ∇· ⃗B (we also
used the second order evaluation of the source term in the cleaning methods).
With the elliptic cleaning there are fewer cells with signiﬁcant ∇· ⃗B values.
All monopole errors concentrate near the many discontinuities, as expected.
Overall, the jet progressed to about the same distance.
The same simulation in full 3D allows for non-axisymmetric deformations,
which can come about from current-driven kink instabilities mediated by the
helical magnetic ﬁeld of the jet, or by the many shear-ﬂow driven events.
35
elliptic
hyperbolic
r
0
10
20
-10
-20
z
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
10log(ρ)
1.3
-1.1
-0.5
0.7
0.1
0.1
0.0
-0.1 -0.05
0.05
div B
elliptic
hyperbolic
r
0
10
-10
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: (a) The logarithm of the density at t = 60 for the helically magnetized jet
in axisymmetric conditions, using the hyperbolic (left) versus the multigrid-based elliptic
(right) treatment for monopole control. (b) The numerical value of ∇· ⃗B, evaluated with a
second order central diﬀerence formula, at t = 60 for the hyperbolic and elliptic approach.
elliptic
elliptic
elliptic
parabolic
parabolic
parabolic
Figure 17: Several views on the 3D jet simulation at t = 60, where we used the parabolic
and elliptic approach for divergence control. We show a cross-section of the temperature
(left), a line-integrated side view of the density (middle) and a line-integrated top view of
the pressure (right).
36
The state at t = 60 is shown in Fig. 17, where we now compare the elliptic
approach to the parabolic one. The cross-sectional temperature view (left),
and the line-of-sight integrated density views (middle) cover the full extent
in z ∈[0, 90], while the integrated pressure view shows the entire x−y cross-
section [−30, 30]2. The turbulent cocoon that develops around the jet spine
aids in retaining a coherent jet over the distance simulated: the turbulence
in the backﬂow region seems to prevent large deformations of the jet. The
overall morphology of the 3D helical jet is very similar with both monopole
corrections.
A more in-depth discussion of the physics in the context of
astrophysical jet propagation is deferred to future work. Fig. 17 shows that
the temperature, density, and pressure variations are all very well recovered
with either method for monopole control.
5. Conclusions
We have presented an MPI-parallel geometric multigrid library. The li-
brary can be used to extend octree-based adaptive mesh reﬁnement frame-
works with an elliptic solver. The library supports multigrid V-cycles and
FMG cycles, and employs standard second-order discretizations. Cartesian
2D/3D and cylindrical 2D grid geometries can be used, with periodic, Dirich-
let, or Neumann boundary conditions. For 3D Poisson problems free-space
boundary conditions are also supported, by using an FFT-based solver on
the coarse grid. The convergence and scaling of the library has been demon-
strated with multiple test problems.
We have demonstrated the coupling of the library to MPI-AMRVAC, an
existing AMR code, by using the multigrid routines for divergence cleaning in
MHD simulations. We have compared three approaches: elliptic, hyperbolic
and parabolic divergence cleaning. Several test cases were presented, in 2D
and 3D Cartesian as well as axisymmetric geometries. Elliptic divergence
cleaning (i.e., using a projection method) was found to work satisfactorily in
all cases, although the other methods generally performed similarly well.
Acknowledgments. JT is supported by postdoctoral fellowship 12Q6117N
from Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO). RK acknowledges support
by FWO-NSFC grant G0E9619N.
The computational resources and services used in this work were pro-
vided by the VSC (Flemish Supercomputer Center), funded by the Research
Foundation – Flanders (FWO) and the Flemish Government – department
EWI.
37
References
[1] A. Gholami, D. Malhotra, H. Sundar, G. Biros, FFT, FMM, or multi-
grid? A comparative study of state-of-the-art Poisson solvers for uniform
and nonuniform grids in the unit cube, SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Com-
puting 38 (3) (2016) C280–C306. doi:10.1137/15m1010798.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/15M1010798
[2] C. Xia, J. Teunissen, I. E. Mellah, E. Chan´e, R. Keppens, MPI-
AMRVAC 2.0 for solar and astrophysical applications, The Astro-
physical Journal Supplement Series 234 (2) (2018) 30. doi:10.3847/
1538-4365/aaa6c8.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/1538-4365/aaa6c8
[3] O. Porth, C. Xia, T. Hendrix, S. P. Moschou, R. Keppens, MPI-
AMRVAC for solar and astrophysics, The Astrophysical Journal Sup-
plement Series 214 (1) (2014) 4. doi:10.1088/0067-0049/214/1/4.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0067-0049/214/1/4
[4] W. Zhang, A. Almgren, M. Day, T. Nguyen, J. Shalf, D. Unat, Boxlib
with tiling: An adaptive mesh reﬁnement software framework, SIAM
Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing 38 (5) (2016) S156–S172.
doi:10.
1137/15m102616x.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/15M102616X
[5] A. S. Almgren, J. B. Bell, A. Nonaka, M. Zingale, A new low Mach
number approach in astrophysics, Computing in Science & Engineering
11 (2) (2009) 24–33. doi:10.1109/mcse.2009.21.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2009.21
[6] S. Popinet, Gerris: a tree-based adaptive solver for the incompress-
ible Euler equations in complex geometries, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 190 (2) (2003) 572–600. doi:10.1016/s0021-9991(03)
00298-5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9991(03)00298-5
[7] R. Teyssier, Cosmological hydrodynamics with adaptive mesh re-
ﬁnement, A&A 385 (1) (2002) 337–364.
doi:10.1051/0004-6361:
20011817.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20011817
38
[8] U. Ziegler, The NIRVANA code: Parallel computational MHD with
adaptive mesh reﬁnement, Computer Physics Communications 179 (4)
(2008) 227–244. doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2008.02.017.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2008.02.017
[9] B. Fryxell, K. Olson, P. Ricker, F. X. Timmes, M. Zingale, D. Q. Lamb,
P. MacNeice, R. Rosner, J. W. Truran, H. Tufo, Flash: An adaptive
mesh hydrodynamics code for modeling astrophysical thermonuclear
ﬂashes, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 131 (1) (2000)
273–334. doi:10.1086/317361.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/317361
[10] P. M. Ricker, A direct multigrid Poisson solver for oct-tree adaptive
meshes, Astrophys J. Suppl. S. 176 (1) (2008) 293–300. doi:10.1086/
526425.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/526425
[11] H. Sundar, G. Biros, C. Burstedde, J. Rudi, O. Ghattas, G. Stadler,
Parallel geometric-algebraic multigrid on unstructured forests of octrees,
2012 International Conference for High Performance Computing, Net-
working, Storage and Analysisdoi:10.1109/sc.2012.91.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SC.2012.91
[12] M. Adams, HPGMG 1.0: A benchmark for ranking high performance
computing systems, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (2014)
LBNL–6630E.
URL https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00r9w79m
[13] R. S. Sampath, S. S. Adavani, H. Sundar, I. Lashuk, G. Biros, Dendro:
Parallel algorithms for multigrid and AMR methods on 2:1 balanced oc-
trees, 2008 SC - International Conference for High Performance Comput-
ing, Networking, Storage and Analysisdoi:10.1109/sc.2008.5218558.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SC.2008.5218558
[14] S. Balay, S. Abhyankar, M. F. Adams, J. Brown, P. Brune, K. Buschel-
man, L. Dalcin, A. Dener, V. Eijkhout, W. D. Gropp, D. Kaushik, M. G.
Knepley, D. A. May, L. C. McInnes, R. T. Mills, T. Munson, K. Rupp,
P. Sanan, B. F. Smith, S. Zampini, H. Zhang, H. Zhang, PETSc Web
page, http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc (2018).
URL http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc
39
[15] R. D. Falgout, U. M. Yang, Hypre: A library of high performance pre-
conditioners, in: Proceedings of the International Conference on Com-
putational Science-Part III, ICCS ’02, Springer-Verlag, London, UK,
UK, 2002, pp. 632–641.
URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645459.653635
[16] W. Hackbusch, Multi-grid methods and applications, Springer Series in
Computational Mathematicsdoi:10.1007/978-3-662-02427-0.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-02427-0
[17] U. Trottenberg, C. Oosterlee, A. Schuller, Multigrid, Elsevier Science,
2000.
[18] W. L. Briggs, V. E. Henson, S. F. McCormick, A Multigrid Tutorial (2nd
Ed.), Society for Industrial & Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA,
USA, 2000.
[19] A. Brandt, O. E. Livne, Multigrid Techniques, Society for Industrial &
Applied Mathematics (SIAM), 2011. doi:10.1137/1.9781611970753.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611970753
[20] S. R. Barros, The Poisson equation on the unit disk: a multigrid solver
using polar coordinates, Applied Mathematics and Computation 25 (2)
(1988) 123–135. doi:10.1016/0096-3003(88)90110-5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0096-3003(88)90110-5
[21] S. R. Barros, Multigrid methods for two- and three-dimensional Poisson-
type equations on the sphere, Journal of Computational Physics 92 (2)
(1991) 313–348. doi:10.1016/0021-9991(91)90213-5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(91)90213-5
[22] J. Teunissen, U. Ebert, Aﬁvo: A framework for quadtree/octree AMR
with shared-memory parallelization and geometric multigrid methods,
Computer Physics Communications 233 (2018) 156–166. doi:10.1016/
j.cpc.2018.06.018.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2018.06.018
[23] R. Keppens, Z. Meliani, A. van Marle, P. Delmont, A. Vlasis, B. van der
Holst, Parallel, grid-adaptive approaches for relativistic hydro and mag-
netohydrodynamics, Journal of Computational Physics 231 (3) (2012)
40
718–744. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2011.01.020.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2011.01.020
[24] P. MacNeice, K. M. Olson, C. Mobarry, R. de Fainchtein, C. Packer,
Paramesh:
A parallel adaptive mesh reﬁnement community toolkit,
Computer Physics Communications 126 (3) (2000) 330–354.
doi:
10.1016/s0010-4655(99)00501-9.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655(99)00501-9
[25] L. Genovese, T. Deutsch, A. Neelov, S. Goedecker, G. Beylkin, Eﬃ-
cient solution of Poisson’s equation with free boundary conditions, The
Journal of Chemical Physics 125 (7) (2006) 074105. doi:10.1063/1.
2335442.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.2335442
[26] M. M. Hejlesen, J. T. Rasmussen, P. Chatelain, J. H. Walther, A high
order solver for the unbounded Poisson equation, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 252 (2013) 458–467. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2013.05.050.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.05.050
[27] L. Genovese, T. Deutsch, S. Goedecker, Eﬃcient and accurate three-
dimensional Poisson solver for surface problems, The Journal of Chem-
ical Physics 127 (5) (2007) 054704. doi:10.1063/1.2754685.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.2754685
[28] G. Morton, A computer oriented geodetic data base; and a new tech-
nique in ﬁle sequencing, IBM Research Report.
[29] J. Brackbill, D. Barnes, The eﬀect of nonzero ∇·B on the numerical solu-
tion of the magnetohydrodynamic equations, Journal of Computational
Physics 35 (3) (1980) 426–430. doi:10.1016/0021-9991(80)90079-0.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(80)90079-0
[30] B. Marder, A method for incorporating Gauss law into electromagnetic
PIC codes, Journal of Computational Physics 68 (1) (1987) 48–55. doi:
10.1016/0021-9991(87)90043-x.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(87)90043-X
[31] K. G. Powell, P. L. Roe, T. J. Linde, T. I. Gombosi, D. L. De Zeeuw,
A solution-adaptive upwind scheme for ideal magnetohydrodynamics,
41
Journal of Computational Physics 154 (2) (1999) 284–309.
doi:10.
1006/jcph.1999.6299.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1999.6299
[32] P. Janhunen, A Positive Conservative Method for Magnetohydrodynam-
ics Based on HLL and Roe Methods, Journal of Computational Physics
160 (2000) 649–661. doi:10.1006/jcph.2000.6479.
[33] P. J. Dellar, A Note on Magnetic Monopoles and the One-Dimensional
MHD Riemann Problem, Journal of Computational Physics 172 (2001)
392–398. doi:10.1006/jcph.2001.6815.
[34] R. Keppens, M. Nool, G. T´oth, J. Goedbloed, Adaptive mesh re-
ﬁnement for conservative systems: multi-dimensional eﬃciency eval-
uation, Computer Physics Communications 153 (3) (2003) 317–339.
doi:10.1016/s0010-4655(03)00139-5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655(03)00139-5
[35] A. Dedner, F. Kemm, D. Kr¨oner, C.-D. Munz, T. Schnitzer, M. Wesen-
berg, Hyperbolic divergence cleaning for the MHD equations, Journal
of Computational Physics 175 (2) (2002) 645–673. doi:10.1006/jcph.
2001.6961.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcph.2001.6961
[36] D. Derigs, A. R. Winters, G. J. Gassner, S. Walch, M. Bohm, Ideal
GLM-MHD: About the entropy consistent nine-wave magnetic ﬁeld di-
vergence diminishing ideal magnetohydrodynamics equations, Journal
of Computational Physics 364 (2018) 420–467. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.
2018.03.002.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.03.002
[37] C. R. Evans, J. F. Hawley, Simulation of magnetohydrodynamic ﬂows -
a constrained transport method, The Astrophysical Journal 332 (1988)
659. doi:10.1086/166684.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/166684
[38] D. S. Balsara, D. S. Spicer, A staggered mesh algorithm using high order
Godunov ﬂuxes to ensure solenoidal magnetic ﬁelds in magnetohydro-
dynamic simulations, Journal of Computational Physics 149 (2) (1999)
42
270–292. doi:10.1006/jcph.1998.6153.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1998.6153
[39] D. Ryu, F. Miniati, T. W. Jones, A. Frank, A divergence-free upwind
code for multidimensional magnetohydrodynamic ﬂows, The Astrophys-
ical Journal 509 (1) (1998) 244–255. doi:10.1086/306481.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/306481
[40] G. T´oth, The ∇·B constraint in shock-capturing magnetohydrodynam-
ics codes, Journal of Computational Physics 161 (2) (2000) 605–652.
doi:10.1006/jcph.2000.6519.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jcph.2000.6519
[41] D. S. Balsara, Divergence-Free Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement for Magneto-
hydrodynamics, Journal of Computational Physics 174 (2001) 614–648.
doi:10.1006/jcph.2001.6917.
[42] S. Fromang, P. Hennebelle, R. Teyssier, A high order Godunov scheme
with constrained transport andadaptive mesh reﬁnement for astrophys-
ical magnetohydrodynamics, Astronomy & Astrophysics 457 (2) (2006)
371–384. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20065371.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20065371
[43] A. J. Cunningham, A. Frank, P. Varni`ere, S. Mitran, T. W. Jones, Sim-
ulating Magnetohydrodynamical Flow with Constrained Transport and
Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement: Algorithms and Tests of the AstroBEAR
Code, Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 182 (2009) 519–542.
arXiv:0710.0424, doi:10.1088/0067-0049/182/2/519.
[44] F. Miniati, D. F. Martin, Constrained-transport magnetohydrodynamics
with adaptive mesh reﬁnement in Charm, The Astrophysical Journal
Supplement Series 195 (1) (2011) 5. doi:10.1088/0067-0049/195/1/5.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0067-0049/195/1/5
[45] H. Olivares,
O. Porth,
Y. Mizuno,
The Black Hole Accretion
Code: adaptive mesh reﬁnement and constrained transport, arXiv e-
printsarXiv:1802.00860.
[46] P. F. Hopkins, A constrained-gradient method to control divergence
errors in numerical MHD, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
43
Society 462 (1) (2016) 576–587. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw1578.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw1578
[47] T. S. Tricco, D. J. Price, M. R. Bate, Constrained hyperbolic diver-
gence cleaning in smoothed particle magnetohydrodynamics with vari-
able cleaning speeds, Journal of Computational Physics 322 (2016) 326–
344. arXiv:1607.02394, doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2016.06.053.
[48] D. S. Balsara, J. Kim, A comparison between divergence-cleaning and
staggered-mesh formulations for numerical magnetohydrodynamics, The
Astrophysical Journal 602 (2) (2004) 1079–1090. doi:10.1086/381051.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/381051
[49] T. A. Gardiner, J. M. Stone, An unsplit Godunov method for ideal MHD
via constrained transport, Journal of Computational Physics 205 (2)
(2005) 509–539. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2004.11.016.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2004.11.016
[50] M. ˇCada, M. Torrilhon, Compact third-order limiter functions for ﬁ-
nite volume methods, Journal of Computational Physics 228 (11) (2009)
4118–4145. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2009.02.020.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2009.02.020
[51] B. Koren, A robust upwind discretization method for advection, diﬀu-
sion and source terms, in: C. Vreugdenhil, B. Koren (Eds.), Numerical
Methods for Advection-Diﬀusion Problems, Braunschweig/Wiesbaden:
Vieweg, 1993, pp. 117–138.
[52] B. Van Leer, Towards the ultimate conservative diﬀerence scheme III.
upstream-centered ﬁnite-diﬀerence schemes for ideal compressible ﬂow,
Journal of Computational Physics 23 (3) (1977) 263–275. doi:10.1016/
0021-9991(77)90094-8.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(77)90094-8
[53] J. P. H. Goedbloed, S. Poedts, Principles of Magnetohydrodynamics,
Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[54] T. Gold, F. Hoyle, On the origin of solar ﬂares, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 120 (2) (1960) 89–105. doi:10.1093/
mnras/120.2.89.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/mnras/120.2.89
44
[55] R. Keppens, Z. Meliani, B. van der Holst, F. Casse, Extragalactic jets
with helical magnetic ﬁelds: relativistic MHD simulations, Astronomy
& Astrophysics 486 (2008) 663–678. arXiv:0802.2034, doi:10.1051/
0004-6361:20079174.
45
